By Records Dept. at 11:59 am, Aug 11, 2025

Effective: September 1, 2025

PHILADELPHIA WATER DEPARTMENT
RATES AND CHARGES
Effective: September 1, 2025.
1.0 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Condominium Properties: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership by the owners
of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the
common elements are vested in the unit owners.
(b) Customer: An owner, Tenant or occupant who by operation of law or agreement is
responsible for payment of the charges for water/sewer/stormwater service at a
Residential, Non-residential or Condominium Property.
(c) Department: The Philadelphia Water Department is the operating department of the
City of Philadelphia with the duties, powers and obligations set forth in the Home Rule
Charter and the Philadelphia Code.
(d) Dwelling Unit: A single unit within a building providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation.
(e) Home Rule Charter: The Philadelphia Home Rule Charter, as codified in Pennsylvania
First Class City Home Rule Act, April 21, 1949 P.L. 665, 351 Pa. Code §1-100 et seq.
(f) Mcf: Thousand cubic feet. The quantity charges in Sections 2, 3, 9 and 10 are
expressed in Mcf.
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons
(g) Municipal Stormwater System: City owned and maintained real property,
infrastructure or natural feature used and/or constructed for purposes of transporting,
conveying, retaining, detaining, or discharging stormwater runoff.
(h) Non-residential Property: Real estate which cannot be classified as either Residential
or Condominium. Real estate used exclusively as a cemetery shall not be considered Nonresidential property.
(i) Philadelphia Code: The body of laws and regulations enacted by the Philadelphia City
Council.


(j) Philadelphia Department of Records: An operating department of the City of
Philadelphia with the duties, powers and obligations set forth in the Home Rule Charter
and the Philadelphia Code.
(k) Property: Any parcel of real estate identified in the records of the Philadelphia
Department of Records.
(l) Property Owner: The owner of the particular parcel of real estate identified in the
records of the Philadelphia Department of Records, or the grantee in a land transfer of
record.
(m) Residential Property: Real estate used exclusively for residential purposes with at
least one and no more than four Dwelling Units and which cannot be classified as
Condominium Property. Property adjacent to Residential Property owned and utilized
exclusively by the Residential Property owner for residential uses. Upon proof submitted
to the Department, said properties shall be deemed by the Department to form one
Residential parcel comprised of the Property and the Residential Property.
(n) Stormwater Management Practice (SMP): Any man-made structure that is designed
and constructed to detain, infiltrate, or otherwise control stormwater runoff quality, rate,
or quantity.
(o) Surface Discharge: The discharge of stormwater runoff from a property to an adjacent
surface water body, without the use of City infrastructure.
(p) Undeveloped Property: Property classified by the Board of Revision of Taxes as SB,
SC, SI, SR, or SS; Undeveloped refers to the status of the property as having no structures
and is not related to whether the property has ever been developed.
(q) Water Commissioner: The Water Commissioner of the City of Philadelphia who
performs the duties and obligations as set forth in the Philadelphia Home Rule Charter and
the Philadelphia Code.
(r) Utility Plan: A plan that shows water, sewer, and/or stormwater connections and sizes,
utility locations, and impacts to rights-of-way, the approval of which is required under the
Administrative Code Section A-305.2.1.6.
1.1 Conformity with Existing Law.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to overrule or annul any existing provisions of
the Home Rule Charter or the Philadelphia Code.
1.2 Severability.

2


If any provision, paragraph, word or sections herein is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words and sections shall not
be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
2.0 WATER CHARGES
Charges for water service supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be effective on
September 1, 2025, as follows:
2.1 General Customers.
Charges for the supplying of water shall be determined and billed as follows:
(a) Charges and billing in general.
(1) Water charges shall consist of a service charge and quantity charge.
(2) A service charge shall be billed monthly.
(3) As set forth in Section 2.1(b), the type and size of the meter shall determine the
service charge.
(4) In addition, there shall be a quantity charge as provided herein for water used in a
monthly billing cycle, either as metered or as estimated.
(5) Quantity charges shall be billed for monthly cycles as provided herein. The cycle
shall be the period between the dates of scheduled metered readings, actual or estimated.
(b) Monthly service charges.
(1) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the monthly service charge for the
various types and sizes of meters shall be as follows:
Size Code Charge
5/8
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2
3
4
6
8
10
12

R
Z
Q
P
X
O
W
N
V
E
T

$5.96
6.93
9.28
14.53
21.55
37.16
64.60
125.19
195.49
283.52
497.73

3


Residential Fire Sprinkler System Meters
Size Code Charge
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2

Z
Q
P
X

12.12
14.47
19.72
26.74

(c) Quantity charges
In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each bill is determined by
applying the quantity charge set forth below to all water use. In addition, the quantity
charge will also include a Tiered Assistance Program (TAP) Rate Rider Surcharge, as set
forth in Section 10.
(1) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the quantity charge portion of each
bill shall be as follows:
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons.
Monthly Water
Usage
First 2 Mcf
(0 to 2 Mcf)
Next 98 Mcf
(2.1 to 100 Mcf)
Next 1,900 Mcf
(100.1 to 2,000 Mcf)
Over 2,000 Mcf

Base Charge
Per Mcf
$71.22

TAP-R
Per Mcf
$3.59

Total Charge
Per Mcf
$74.81

63.61

3.59

67.20

49.38

3.59

52.97

48.03

3.59

51.62

Note: Actual TAP-R rates are subject to Annual Reconciliation and the determination of the
Rate Board.
(d) Temporary Transitional Provisions: Some special customers whose charges are now
based on meter size may find that they are in fact 'over-metered' - their metered service is
too large for their actual requirements and results in excessive bills. They may apply for a
downward revision in the size of their meters. After the approval of the Department, the
revision of plumbing arrangements and the installation of smaller meter, the lower charge
by meter size shall apply.

4


3.0 SEWER CHARGES
Charges for sewer service supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be effective on
September 1, 2025, as follows:
3.1 General Customers.
(a) All customers discharging wastewater into the City’s wastewater system shall pay
sewer charges as set forth in Section 3.3. In addition to the charges set forth in Section
3.3, all customers discharging wastewater whose pollutant content is greater than the
pollutant content of Normal Wastewater, as defined below in Section 3.1(b), shall pay an
additional surcharge as set forth in Section 3.4.
(b) Normal Wastewater subject to the regular sewer charges set forth in Section 3.3 is that
wastewater which contains 250 milligrams per liter or less of five day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD5) and 350 milligrams or less per liter or less of suspended solids (SS).
(c) Wastewater subject to the surcharge set forth in Section 3.4 is that wastewater which
contains either more than 250 milligrams per liter of BOD5 or more than 350 milligrams
per liter of SS, or both.
3.2 Charges.
(a) Sewer charges shall consist of a service charge and a quantity charge.
(b) A service charge shall be billed monthly.
(c) As set forth in Section 3.3(a), the size of the meter shall determine the service charge.
(d) In addition, as set forth in Section 3.3(b), there shall be a quantity charge for sewer
service in a monthly billing cycle, either as metered or as estimated.
(e) Quantity charges shall be billed for monthly cycles as provided herein. The cycle shall
be between the dates of scheduled metered readings, actual or estimated. Quantity charges
imposed shall be based on the water usage of the Property served.
3.3 Regular Sewer Charges.
(a) Monthly service charges shall be determined and billed as follows:
(1) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the monthly service charge for the
various sizes of meters shall be as follows:
Size

Code

Charge

5


5/8
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2
3
4
6
8
10
12

R
Z
Q
P
X
O
W
N
V
E
T

$8.05
10.31
15.18
26.82
41.42
74.78
127.01
250.47
396.50
572.18
1041.23

Residential Fire Sprinkler System Meters
Size Code Charge
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2

Z
Q
P
X

8.05
8.05
8.05
8.05

(b) Quantity charge
In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each sewer bill is
determined by applying the quantity charge rate shown below to all water use. In
addition, the quantity charge will also include a TAP Rate Rider Surcharge, as set forth in
Section 10.
1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
(1)

Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the quantity charge shall be:
Base Charge
Per Mcf
$46.55

TAP-R
Per Mcf
$5.07

Total Charge
Per Mcf
$51.62

3.4 Surcharge.
(a) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the surcharge for wastewater by definition
in excess of Normal Wastewater shall be fixed at fifty and four tenths cents ($0.504) per
pound of pollutants received into the wastewater system in excess of 250 milligrams per

6


liter of BOD5 and fifty-two and three tenths cents ($0.523) per pound of pollutants
received into the wastewater system in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of SS.
(b) The BOD5 and SS of wastewater shall be determined from samples taken on the
Customer's Property at any period or time and of such duration and in such manner as the
Department may prescribe or at any place mutually agreed upon between the Customer
and the Department. With prior written approval of the Department, the results of routine
sampling and analyses by the Customer may be used in determining the amount of the
surcharge.
(c) If, in the Department's judgment, sampling of wastewater is neither feasible nor
practical, the Department, for billing purposes, may base BOD5 and SS of the wastewater
on sampling results for similar discharge and/or values obtained from technical literature.
(d) Customers discharging wastewater subject to the surcharge shall, as prescribed by the
Department:
(1) Install and maintain such facilities for sampling and measuring the wastewater
discharged from their properties; and
(2) Maintain such records and information deemed necessary for the determination of
the surcharge.
(e) Customers, as required from time to time, shall file with the Department responses to a
questionnaire establishing or revising pertinent information on the quantity of flow and the
quality of wastewater and other data deemed necessary for the determination of the
surcharge.
(f) Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater subject to
surcharge shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF).
(g) The surcharge shall be applied to the total wastewater discharged less any portion
excluded by the Department.
3.5 Sewer Credits.
Pursuant to Section 13-101(6) of the Philadelphia Code, the method of crediting water
users’ sewer bills for City water used but not discharged into the wastewater disposal
system shall be as follows.
(a) Eligibility. Where commercial and industrial facilities that use City water do not
discharge all of such water into the wastewater system, the quantity of such water may be
excluded in determining the proper sewer charge, provided that:

7


(1) at least 5% of water used, or
(2) 225,000 cubic feet per year, whichever is less, is not discharged into the
wastewater system.
(b) Determination of the Amount of Exclusion. To determine the amount of such
exclusion the Customer shall install a meter or measuring device satisfactory to the
Department provided that, if in the opinion of the Department, it is not feasible to install a
meter or measuring device, some other satisfactory method of measuring (“credit factor”)
may be designated by the Department on application of the Customer.
(c) Fee for Application. When the Customer applies to the Department for a
determination on the quantity of water to be excluded by some method other than
metering of the sewer, or re-applies for a revised method measuring a larger quantity of
water to be excluded, there shall be charge of one thousand six hundred and ten dollars
($1,610) for the review of such application.
(d) Effective Date of Credits and Approved Credit Factors. Credits on a water user’s
sewer bills for quantities of water used but not discharged into the wastewater disposal
system shall be effective from the submission date of an approved application. In order to
be reviewed for approval, applications shall be complete, submitted on forms provided by
the Department and shall be accompanied by a check payable to the City of Philadelphia
in the amount required in Section 3.5(c). No credits shall be made retroactively.
(e) Review of Approved Credit Factors. The Department reserves the right to review
approved credit factors. Customers may, from time to time, be required to submit current
water use and sewer discharge information. Customers may also be required to submit
new applications for the credit factor. Failure to comply with the Department’s requests
for information or new applications may result in termination of the Customer’s credit
factor.
(f) Failure to Inform the Department of Increased Sewer Use. Customers with credit
factors who fail to inform the Department of increased discharges to the wastewater
system shall be subject to the imposition of the full charges for sewer use based on total
water usage from the most recent application date, with applicable interest. In addition,
the Department may impose a fine of five hundred and ninety-five dollars ($595) for each
billing period from the application date.
4.0 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGES
Charges for Stormwater Management Services (SWMS) supplied by the City of
Philadelphia shall be effective September 1, 2025 as follows:
4.1 Charges.

8


All properties within the City shall be billed a SWMS charge.
4.2 Residential Properties.
All Residential Properties shall be charged a monthly SWMS charge and a monthly
Billing and Collection charge as follows:
(a) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter all Residential Properties shall be charged
the rates listed below:
SWMS
$19.03

Billing & Collection
$2.01

(b) Residential Properties which do not have sewer service and which also have
previously been charged only for water service shall be charged the rates shown above at
4.2 (a).
4.3 Non-Residential Properties.
Non-Residential Properties shall be charged a monthly SWMS charge and a monthly
Billing and Collection charge as follows:
(a) Non-residential Properties shall be charged based on the Gross Area (GA) of the
Property and the Impervious Area (IA) of the Property.
(1) GA includes all of the Property area within the legally described boundaries
except streets, medians, and sidewalks in the public right-of-way and railroad tracks and
station platforms in the railroad right-of-way.
(2) IA includes surfaces which are compacted or covered with material that
restricts infiltration of water, including semi-pervious surfaces such as compacted clay,
most conventionally hard-scaped surfaces such as streets, driveways, roofs, sidewalks,
parking lots, attached and detached structures, and other similar surfaces.
(i) For Non-residential Properties with less than 5,000 square feet GA, the
IA shall be estimated as a percentage of GA.
(A) For Undeveloped Property as defined in Section 1.0, the IA
shall be 25% of the GA.
(B) For other Properties, the IA shall be 85% of the GA.

9


(3) In determining the GA Factor and IA Factor of a Property for the SWMS
charge, the Department shall use increments of 500 square feet rounding up to the next
highest increment.
(4) Calculating the Monthly SWMS charge. The monthly SWMS charge for each
Non-residential Property is calculated by:
(i) dividing the GA in square feet by 500 and rounding up to the next whole
unit to determine the GA Factor, then multiplying the GA Factor by the GA Rate to
determine the GA charge;
(ii) dividing the IA in square feet by 500 and rounding up to the next whole
unit to determine the IA Factor, then multiplying the IA Factor by the IA Rate to
determine the IA charge;
(iii) the addition of the GA charge and the IA Charge equals the SWMS
charge; and
(iv) the addition of the SWMS charge and the Billing and Collection charge
together equals the total monthly stormwater charge.
(5) Rates for GA, IA and Billing and Collection.
(i) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the Rates shall be as
follows:
GA
IA
($/500 s.f.) ($/500 s.f.)
0.914

Billing & Collection

6.423

$2.61

(6) Minimum Monthly Charges. Non-residential Properties shall be subject to a
minimum monthly charge. If the monthly charge calculated in Section 4.3(a)(4) is less
than the monthly charges listed below then the monthly charges below shall be billed to
the Property.
SWMS
$19.03

Billing & Collection
$2.61

(7) Adjustment Appeal Procedure.

10


(i) Customers may appeal the GA and/or IA calculations, property
classification, or charge distribution of their property.
(ii) Adjustments shall be made using forms and procedures as defined by
the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual and sent to:

Philadelphia Water Department
SWMS Charge Appeals
1101 Market Street
4th Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19107-2994
(iii) Adjustments to the GA and/or IA determination are separate and
distinct from the billing review procedures established by Section 19-1702 of the
Philadelphia Code.
(iv) The grounds supporting the adjustment shall be stated in writing, and
include any exhibits, such as photographs, drawings or maps, site plans, and affidavits that
support the claim. In addition, a land survey prepared by a registered surveyor shall be
attached showing all Dwelling Units, total property area, type of surface material and
impervious area, as appropriate, and any other information requested in writing by the
Department. The Department may waive the submission of a land survey, if the
Department determines that the survey is not necessary to make a determination on the
appeal.
(v) The Customer filing the appeal is solely responsible to demonstrate, by
clear and convincing evidence, that the GA and/or IA square footage information used by
the Department, from which the adjustment appeal is being taken, is erroneous.
(vi) The filing of a notice of an adjustment appeal shall not stay the
imposition, calculation or duty to pay the SWMS charge.
(vii) If the adjustment appeal results in a revised GA and/or IA calculation,
correction of property classification, correction of parcel identification, or revisions to the
default charge allocation, then the adjusted SWMS Charge will be effective from the date
of receipt of the Adjustment Appeals Application; except that the Department may authorize
WRB to credit accounts for adjustments to the GA and/or IA calculation for a period not to
exceed three years prior to receipt of the Adjustment Appeals Application if the Customer
filing the appeal demonstrates, by clear and convincing evidence, that it was eligible for and
qualified to receive the adjustment during the three year period prior to the receipt of the
Adjustment Appeals Application was incorrect.
(8) Multiple Accounts Serving One Property. Where there are multiple water
accounts on a single Property, the entire SWMS charge of that Property shall be divided

11


equally among the accounts. Each account shall also be billed a Billing and Collection
charge. Property Owners shall have the opportunity to request an alternative allocation of
the SWMS Charge.
4.4 Condominium Properties.
(a) Condominium Properties shall be charged SWMS and Billing and Collection charges
on the same terms as Non-residential Properties under Section 4.3, but shall be billed as
follows:
(1) Condominium Properties with a single water meter account shall be billed
such that the entire SWMS charge of the condominium complex property plus a Billing
and Collection Charge are billed to that single account.
(2) Condominium Properties with individual water meter accounts for each unit
shall be billed such that the entire SWMS charge of the condominium complex property
shall be divided and billed equally to each individual account. In addition, each account
shall be billed a Billing and Collection Charge.
(3) Condominium Properties with more than one water meter, but without
individual water meters for each unit, shall be billed such that the entire SWMS charge of
the condominium complex property shall be divided equally among the accounts. Each
account shall also be billed a Billing and Collection Charge. The Condominium Owner’s
Association shall have the opportunity to request an alternative allocation of the SWMS
charge.
4.5 SWMS Credits
(a) Eligibility.
(1) Accounts on Non-residential and Condominium properties must be current to
be eligible for credits.
(2) The Customer shall make the Property available for inspection by the
Department and provide all necessary documentation for purposes of verifying the
appropriateness of a SWMS credit(s).
(3) The Customer shall fulfill credit requirements, as described in Section 4.5(c)
below, in accordance with the maintenance guidelines as prescribed by the Department,
including any and all inspection and reporting obligations.
(b) Classes of Credits. There are three classes of credits: IA Credit, GA Credit, and
NPDES Credit. The IA Credit provides a reduction to the IA Charge; the GA Credit
provides a reduction to GA Charge; and the NPDES Credit provides reduction to the total
SWMS Charge. A Property may be approved for credits from each of the three classes;

12


however, if the resulting SWMS Charge after the application of any credits is less than the
Non-residential minimum monthly charge, then the minimum monthly charge will apply.
(c) Credit Requirements.
(1) IA Credit. IA Credit is available for the portion of IA on a property where
stormwater runoff is managed (IA Managed). IA Managed is achieved as follows:
(i) For areas of the property that meet the requirements of the following
Impervious Area Reductions (IAR), as described in the Stormwater Credits and
Adjustment Appeals Manual, a direct reduction in the billable IA may be applied:
(A) Rooftop disconnection,
(B) Pavement disconnection, or
(C) Tree canopy coverage.
(ii) For Properties with PWD-approved Stormwater Management Practices constructed
per Chapter 6 of the Department’s regulations, the customer must demonstrate compliance
with the regulations, including management of the first 1.5 inches of runoff and any and
all required reporting, inspection and maintenance activities, except as otherwise provided
in 4.5(c)(1)(iv).
(iii) For properties with PWD-approved Stormwater Management
Practices, including those constructed with Department stormwater grant funds, the
customer must demonstrate management of the first 1.5” of runoff and SMP compliance
per the approved record drawing and any and all reporting, inspection and maintenance
activities, except as otherwise provided in 4.5(c)(1)(iv).
(iv) The Department may approve a Property for IA credit for Non-Surface
Water Discharges under the credit requirements in effect before September 1, 2021, if the
Department receives a credit application for that Property on or before September 1, 2021.
Such Properties property receiving credit under the credit requirements in effect before
September 1, 2021 may continue to receive the credit under those requirements until the
credit expires. Upon expiration of the credit, the current or future Property Owners of
such Properties may renew the credit under the credit requirements in effect before
September 1, 2021 by submitting a renewal application(s) in accordance with Subsection
4.5(f)(4) unless and until this section is modified.1
(v) For Surface Discharges, the Customer must demonstrate that a portion or
all of the impervious area discharges directly to a surface water body.

1

Prior to September 1, 2021, Customers of Properties with non-Surface Discharges were required to
demonstrate management of the first inch of stormwater runoff in one of the three following ways: (1)
infiltration, (2) detention and slow release, and/or (3) routing through an approved volume -reducing SMP.

13


(2) GA Credit.
(i) Impervious area only. Impervious area shall receive a GA credit based on
the criteria defined in Section 4.5(c)(1)(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) herein.
(ii) Open Space area only. Open Space area is non-impervious area and is
calculated as GA minus IA. The Customer must demonstrate a Natural Resource
Conservation Service Curve Number (NRCS-CN) below a certain value as described
in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(3) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Credit. The Customer
must demonstrate the property is subject to and in compliance with a NPDES Permit for
industrial stormwater discharge activities.
(d) Credit Maximum.
(1)

IA Credit Maximum. IA Credit maximums shall apply as follows:

(i) All Non-residential and Condominium properties are eligible for a
maximum of 80% IA Credit for the IA Managed.
(ii) A Non-residential or Condominium property with Surface Discharge is
eligible for a maximum of 90% IA credit for the IA Managed.
(2)

GA Credit Maximum. GA Credit maximums shall apply as follows:

(i) All Non-residential and Condominium properties are eligible for a
maximum of 80% GA Credit.
(ii) A Non-residential or Condominium property with Surface Discharge is
eligible for a maximum of 90% GA credit.
(3)
NPDES Credit Maximum. Eligible properties shall receive a maximum of
7% NPDES credit as described in the Credit and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(e) Application of Credits
The application of the three classes of credits in calculating a property’s monthly SWMS
charge shall be described in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(f) Administration of Credits.
(1) A Customer shall apply for credits using application forms and submitting the
required documentation as defined in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.

14


(2) Any engineering or other costs incurred in completing the application shall be
borne by the Customer.
(3) Credits shall be effective upon receipt of a complete application.
(4) All credits shall expire four (4) years from the effective date of the credit. A
Customer may renew credits by submitting a renewal application, documentation required
by the Department as defined in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual, and paying
a renewal fee of five hundred and fifty-five dollars ($555).
(g) Termination of Credits.
(1) The Department may review any approved credit at any time to verify its
continued applicability. Customers may from time to time be asked to submit
documentation and/or grant access to the Property receiving the credit. Failure to comply
with such requests may result in the termination of the credit(s).
(2) The Customer’s failure to meet credit requirements or comply with inspection
and reporting obligations, in accordance with Section 4.5(a)(3), shall result in a suspension
or revocation of all affected credits pursuant to the procedures issued by the Department.
(h) The Department may, at its sole discretion, issue stormwater credits to individual
parcels where stormwater management is being implemented on a shared, collective basis
by an organization representing different parcel owners within a defined geographic area.
5.0 BILLING FOR WATER, SEWER AND STORMWATER SERVICE
5.1 Billing.
(a) Estimated Usage and Billing. When an accurate meter reading cannot be obtained at
the time of a scheduled meter reading or when necessary for administrative purposes, the
quantity of water used may be estimated for billing purposes. Estimated usage will be
based upon actual meter readings from prior cycles or by such other fair and reasonable
methods as shall be approved by the Water Commissioner. Where the water usage is
estimated because of inability to read the meter, any necessary corrections shall be made
at the time of the next actual meter reading, or when appropriate.
(b) Charges to be Combined. At the discretion of the Water Commissioner, each bill may
combine in one amount the service charge and any quantity charges for water, sewer and
stormwater, if applicable.
(c) Bills Due and Payable. All bills are due and payable when rendered.
(d) Penalties for Late Payments.

15


(1) If current water, sewer, and stormwater bills are not paid within thirty (30) days
from the date indicated on the bill, a penalty of five percent (5%) shall be imposed.
(2) An additional penalty of one half of one percent (0.5%) shall be imposed and
added to water, sewer, and stormwater bills on the due date of the bill of each succeeding
cycle, except that a period of thirty (30) days shall elapse before the first additional penalty
is imposed.
(3) If any water, sewer, and stormwater bill remains unpaid for two cycles after the
bill has been rendered, the Revenue Department shall serve a notice of termination upon
the delinquent Property Owner and, if the charge, with penalties thereon, is not paid within
ten (10) days after such service of notice, the Department, in its discretion, may suspend
water service to the Property until the charge with penalties is paid. Penalties for late
payment are set by ordinance, not by regulation, and any amendments to the current
ordinance shall apply as provided therein.
(e) Balance Due. Each bill shall include any balances due for bills issued from October 1,
2000, including penalties.
(f) Changes in Meter Size. When a change in meter size is made, the charge for the new
meter size shall become effective on the date of such change.
(g) Unmetered Customers.
(1) Unmetered Customers shall be billed the same charges established for metered
Customers. The water and sewer service charges will be determined by the size of the
meter which would be installed for an equivalent service at a similar property. The
SWMS charges will be determined based on Section 4.0. The Revenue Department shall
estimate the quantity of water used and bill accordingly using the applicable water and
sewer quantity charges.
(2) Where unmetered wastewater is discharged to the sewer system without
adequate sewer metering, the Department reserves the right to bill the amount of flow
based upon its engineering judgment of a reasonable estimate of unmetered usage.
(h) Unoccupied Property.
The billing of unoccupied Properties for water and sewer shall be discontinued only on
issuance of a Discontinuance of Water permit. Nothing in this Section shall relieve a
Property Owner of his responsibility for maintaining a service line unless a
Discontinuance of Water permit has been secured. Under no circumstances will the
stormwater service charge be terminated.
(i) Extraordinary Uses or Appliances.

16


In the event that extraordinary or peculiar uses or appliances, in the opinion of the Water
Commissioner, warrant a special charge not provided herein, such charges shall be as
fixed by the Water Commissioner in writing.
5.2 Special Customers.
The water, sewer and stormwater management service charges established in Sections 2.0
et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq. shall be applied to all general Customers, except the
following groups of special Customers:
(a) GROUP I
(1) Public and private schools which provide instruction up to or below the twelfth
grade but not beyond that grade, and excluding service to any separate or adjoining
facilities or structures not used exclusively for educational or instructional purposes.
(2) Institutions of “purely public charity”, as defined by the Charity Water Rates and
Charges Program Regulations in Chapter 2 of the Department’s regulations, except
universities and colleges and excluding service to any separate or adjoining facilities or
structures not used exclusively for the principal purpose of the charity.
(3) Places used for actual religious worship.
(b) GROUP II
(1) Residences of eligible senior citizens provided that the senior citizen shall:
(i) Make application for such reduction to the Revenue Department within
the first billing period for which reduction is sought; and
(ii) Submit satisfactory proof that the applicant is 65 years of age or older
and that he or she makes payment directly to the City for water, sewer, and stormwater
service to his or her residence which is located in the City of Philadelphia; and
(iii) Submit satisfactory proof to the Revenue Department that the applicant
does not exceed the household income limitation of $42,100 per year established by the
Department. The above income limitation shall apply to those applying for this discount
subsequent to June 30, 1982.
(iv) Effective with each subsequent general rate change in the
water/sewer/stormwater charges, the Department shall adjust the Senior Citizen Income
Limitation using the latest Consumer Price Index data available, as defined in the
Philadelphia Code at Section 19-1901.
(c) GROUP III

17


(1) Universities and colleges, excluding service to any separate or adjoining facilities
or structures not used exclusively for educational or instructional purposes.
(d) GROUP IV
(1) Public housing properties of the Philadelphia Housing Authority.
(e) GROUP V
(1) Group V Customers are Customers enrolled in the Income-Based Water Revenue
Assistance Program (IWRAP) described in Section 19-1605 of the Philadelphia Code after
the Water Revenue Bureau begins to issue IWRAP bills. Monthly bills for a Customer
enrolled in IWRAP will be determined based on the Customer’s family size and household
income and will be charged in lieu of the service, usage and stormwater charges
established in Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq. and 4.0 et seq. for general Customers. Group
V Customers will pay a percentage of his/her household income depending on where that
Customer falls within the Federal Poverty Guidelines (FPL), subject to a minimum bill
amount of $12 per month.
(2) For determining the amount of service, usage and stormwater charges on monthly
bills, Group V Customers will be defined according to three income tiers as follows:
(i) Group V-A. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being from 0% of FPL and up to and including 50% of FPL
(ii) Group V-B. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being greater than 50% of FPL and up to and including 100% of FPL.
(iii) Group V-C. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being greater than 100% of FPL and up to and including 150% of FPL.
(f) GROUP VI
(1) Customers with parcels eligible for a discount from the stormwater
management service charge as a qualified Community Garden pursuant to Section 191603 of the Philadelphia Code and regulations promulgated by the Water Department
under that Section.
(g) GROUP VII
(1) All unoccupied properties of the Philadelphia Land Bank.
(h) Charges for Special Customers

18


(1) As of September 1, 2021, the charges to Groups I, II, and III of special
Customers listed above shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the charges as established
in Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq., including both the water and sewer
service and quantity charges, and the SWMS charges. The charges to Group IV
Customers shall be ninety-five percent (95%) of the charges as established in Sections 2.0
et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq., including both the water and sewer service and quantity
charges, and the SWMS charges.
(2) Group V Customers enrolled in IWRAP after the Water Revenue Bureau
begins to issue IWRAP bills will be responsible for paying the following charges for
service, usage and stormwater charges, or $12 per month, whichever is greater:
(i) Group V-A: 2.0% of household income.
(ii) Group V-B: 2.5% of household income.
(iii) Group V-C: 3% of household income.
(3) Group VI: Effective with bills issued on or after January 1, 2017, Group VI
special Customers will receive a 100% discount on the stormwater management service
charges for parcels classified by the Department as Community Gardens upon approval of
an application for a discount consistent with Section 19-1603 of the Philadelphia Code and
regulations promulgated by the Department under that Section.
(4) Group VII: Effective with bills issued on or after September 1, 2018, Group VII
special Customers are fully exempt from all water, sewer and stormwater management
rates and charges.
(i) All of these special Customers shall meter all water connections and they shall be
subject to all provisions herein not inconsistent with Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq., and
4.0 et seq.
(j) All special Customers are subject at any time to review as to their special charges by
the Department or the Water Revenue Bureau and may be required to furnish adequate
evidence supporting the continuance of such charges to the Department or the Water
Revenue Bureau upon written notice to do so. Failure to furnish such evidence shall be
sufficient ground for denial or termination of such special charges.
(k) Special charges may be granted subject to the Department's review and approval of the
size of the meter installed.
(l) When the special use for which the special charge is granted ceases, the special charge
ceases and the charges for general Customers shall apply thereafter.

19


(m) When any vacant or unoccupied premises are acquired by the City, charges for water
and sewer, including charges relating to storm water management and disposal, shall
terminate on the date that such premises are acquired.
(n) When any property is acquired or held by the Philadelphia Housing Development
Corporation or acquired or held by the City or the Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
Chapters 16-400 or 16-500 of the Philadelphia Code, charges for water and sewer,
including charges relating to storm water management and disposal, shall be abated.
5.3 Eligibility for Charity Rates and Charges.
The Department has promulgated regulations to manage the eligibility for and
administration of Charity Rates and Charges.
5.4 Account Review.
The Department, from time to time, may review the status of organizations receiving
Charity Rates and Charges.
During this review, eligible organizations may be required to submit new applications.
5.5 No Waiver.
Nothing herein shall limit the Department on its own findings or at the request of another
City agency from suspending Charity Rates and Charges from organizations which have
violated City law or regulations and thereby under such City law or regulations have
forfeited such privileges as the Charity Rates and Charges.
6.0 MISCELLANEOUS WATER CHARGES
Charges for miscellaneous water services supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall
become effective September 1, 2025 as follows:
6.1 Meter Test Charges.
(a) A Customer may apply to the Department for a test of the accuracy of the registration
of a water meter (Meter Test). At the Customer’s request, the Department shall notify the
Customer of the time and place of the test so that the Customer may be present.
(b) In testing, meters may be removed from the line and replaced by a tested meter. If
removed, the meter shall be tested at the Department’s Meter Shop. Meters may also be
tested and recalibrated in place without removal and replacement.

20


(c) All meters shall be removed, replaced, tested or calibrated during the Department’s
regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.).
(d) A Customer may request a Meter Test to be performed outside the regular business
hours of the Department under the following conditions:
(1) the Department has staff available and agrees to a time outside the regular
business hours of the Department; and,
(2) the Customer agrees to pay the overtime and added expenses, whether the
meter passes or fails the test.
(e) If the register on the meter is found upon testing to be registering within two percent
(2%) of the actual volume of water passing through the meter, or registering in favor of
the Customer, the Customer will be assessed a Meter Test Charge as follows:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”

$160

1”, 1-1/2”, 2”

$225

3”, 4”, 6”, 8”, 10”, 12”
$425
---------------------------------------------Field Tests, 3” and above
$425
(plus any charges and/or expenses incurred for work performed outside the regular hours
of business, if requested by the Customer).
(f) If the meter is found upon testing to be registering in excess of 102% of the actual
volume of water passing through the meter, the Customer shall not be assessed a Meter
Test charge as provided for in subsection (e); and, WRB shall review the billing history of
the tested meter for a period not to exceed three years on the basis of the corrected
registration and revise it as necessary.
(g) The Department will, at the request of a Customer, test his or her meter at no charge
once every twenty years. Additional tests are subject to the charges listed in Section
6.1(e).
6.2 Charges for Furnishing and Installation of Water Meters.
The charges for furnishing and installing water meters are as follows.
(a) For work which involves the furnishing and setting of a water meter and meter
interface unit (MIU), the following charges are hereby established:

21


Meter Size

Charge

5/8”
¾ RFSS
1”
1” RFSS
11/2”
1 1/2” RFSS
2”
2” RFSS
3” Compound
3” Turbine
3” Fire Series
4” Compound
4” Turbine
4” Fire Series
4” Fire Assembly
6” Compound
6” Turbine
6” Fire Series
6” Fire Assembly
8” Turbine
8” Fire Series
8” Fire Assembly
10” Turbine
10” Fire Series
10” Fire Assembly
12” Turbine
12” Fire Series
12” Fire Assembly

$300
540
455
565
1,220
1,040
1,220
1,260
4,145
2,045
4,105
5,495
3,270
5,415
7,615
8,215
6,180
7,205
11,975
7,365
9,435
15,425
10,590
11,645
22,340
11,325
14,790
23,805

(b) For work which involves only the furnishing and setting of an MIU, the following
charges are hereby established:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”
¾” RFSS
1”
1 ” RFSS
1 1/2”
1 ½” RFSS
2”
2” RFSS
3” Compound
3” Turbine

$ 100
100
150
150
150
150
150
150
340
340

22


4” Compound
4” Turbine
6” Compound
6” Turbine
8”
10”

340
340
340
340
340
340

(c) If extraordinary work is required in connection with the installation of a water meter
or the replacement of a damaged meter, additional charges shall be computed using actual
salaries and materials expended, plus applicable overhead costs.
(d) The Property Owner shall be responsible for safeguarding the meter and seals and
shall pay for necessary repairs and replacements due to his/her failure to provide adequate
protection to the meter and seals from theft, vandalism, freezing, tampering or other
damage. The Property Owner shall also be responsible for the repair and maintenance of
the plumbing accessory to the meter, such as inoperable valves, weakened service pipes
and fittings, etc. and shall provide and pay for such plumbing, repair and maintenance as
City metering needs may require.
6.3 Tampering of Meter.
(a) In the event that an investigation indicates that tampering of a meter has occurred, the
following charges to the Customer shall be assessed:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”or 3/4”
1”, 1½”, 2”
3” and larger

$ 110
170
380

6.4 Shut-Off and Restoration of Water Service.
(a) If the Department is required to visit a Property to shut off service for non-payment;
and, payment is tendered at the time of the shut-off, a charge of one hundred dollars
($100) will be assessed, with the exception stated in Section 6.4(e).
(b) A one hundred dollar ($100) charge will be assessed if shut-off of the water service is
required as a result of non-compliance with a Notice of Defect and/or metering noncompliance.
(c) After termination of water service for non-payment or violation of service
requirements, restoration of water service will not be made until the following charges
have been paid in full or payment arrangements satisfactory to the Revenue Department
have been made.
(1) Where the only work required is operating the service valve:

23


(i) service lines 2” and smaller.....................................................................$100
with the exception stated in Section 6.4(e)
(ii) service lines larger than 2”………… ..............................................…...$385
(2) Where the curb stop is obstructed, the access box missing or otherwise requires
excavation .....................................................................................................................$790
(3) Where the curb stop is inoperable and a new curb stop must be installed ...$830
(4) Where the curb stop is obstructed, the access box missing, or otherwise
requires excavation, and replacement of footway paving is required ............................$805
(5) Where the curb stop is inoperable and a new curb box must be installed and
replacement of footway paving is required ....................................................................$840
(6) Where excavation and shut-off of the ferrule at the water main is required
.....................................................................................................................................$1,615
(d) If the Department is required to remove concrete footway paving in order to perform
the shut-off and/or restoration, the footway will be replaced by the Department and the
preceding charges applied unless proof has been provided to the Department that some
other qualified person will replace the paving.
(e) A charge of $12 will be assessed if a Customer is enrolled in IWRAP and the
Department is required to visit the Property to:
(1) shut off service for non-payment; and, payment is tendered at the time of the
shut-off; or
(2) restore water service after termination of water service for non-payment or
violation of service requirements.
6.5 Pumping of Properties.
The following charges shall apply for the pumping of water from properties when the
condition requiring such service is not caused by the Department.
(a) Occupied Properties
(1) Pumping of water from occupied Properties may be done at the Property
Owner's request and expense.

24


(2) Pumping of other Properties due to the failure of a Property Owner’s piping
may be performed by the Department and be charged to the Property Owner of the
Property at which the failure occurred.
(3) Charges for pumping shall be calculated at actual salaries and materials
expended, plus applicable overhead costs.
(b) Unoccupied Properties
The Department may, at its sole and exclusive discretion, pump water from unoccupied
properties if it is determined that a serious condition exists. The charges for pumping
shall be as specified in Section 6.5(a).
6.6 Charges for Water Main Shutdown.
(a) The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall issue permits for the temporary
shutdown of a water main to allow a registered plumber to make immediate repairs to a
broken water service and to avoid the necessity of opening the street.
(b) Permits shall be issued after:
(1) Certification by the Department that the shutdown will not seriously
inconvenience other Customers; and
(2) The applicant has paid a three hundred and sixty dollar ($360) service charge.
(c) In an emergency or when responsibility for a leak is in doubt, the Department may
make the shutdown before the permit is obtained. If the Department determines that the
leak was not the Department's responsibility, the owner shall obtain a permit and pay the
above stated service charge and any other costs incurred by the Department in conducting
the emergency shut down.
6.7 Water Connection Charges.
(a) Permits. Permits for connections to the City's water supply system shall be issued by
the Water Permit section of the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
(b) Ferrule Connections.
(1) Connections between 3/4 inch and two inches (2”) in diameter shall be made
by a ferrule installed by the Department. The owner, at his own expense, shall excavate
for the connection, install all piping and appurtenances after the ferrule and fill the
excavation. The owner thereafter shall be responsible for maintaining this piping and
appurtenance.

25


(2) The charges for such ferrule connections, with the exception stated in Section
6.7(b)(3), shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

¾”
1”
1½”
2”

$235
265
330
430

(3) The charges for such ferrule connections, when the work performed at the
Customer’s request is not during the Department’s regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to
4:45 p.m.), shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

¾”
1”
1½”
2”

$260
295
355
455

(c) Valve Connections. Connections three inches (3”) and larger shall be made by a valve
installed by the Department. This valve installation shall include, but shall not necessarily
be limited to, the connection to the main, the valve, valve box, necessary piping after the
valve from the main in the street to one foot inside the curb, backfill and repaving. The
Department shall thereafter be responsible for maintaining this valve and piping, unless
the associated meter has been reduced at the Property Owner’s request to a two inch (2”)
or smaller meter, in which case the Property Owner shall be responsible for valve and
piping maintenance.
(1) The charges for valve connections shall, with the exceptions stated in Section
6.7(c)(2), shall be as follows:
Size
3" & 4”
6” & 8”
10” & 12”

Charge
$14,330
15,505
18,950

(2) The charge for such valve connections, when the work is performed at the
Customer’s request is during other than normal work hours or the work is performed in an
area designated by the Streets Department as a special work zone, shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

26


3” & 4”
6” & 8”
10” & 12”

$16,425
17,600
21,045

(d) Attachment to a Transmission Main
(1) There shall be no connection to a transmission main without Department
approval. Such approval shall be requested by application forms and procedures issued by
the Department.
(2) Where a connection is made to a water main larger than 12 inches in diameter,
with the exceptions stated in Sections 6.7(d)(3)&(4), the charges will be a follows:
SLEEVE

3” & 4”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$24,805
27,900
30,910
47,285
56,695
6” & 8”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$25,095
27,440
30,910
49,990
62,930
10” & 12”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”

$25,150
28,700
30,910
50,990
66,810

(3) The charges for such connections, when the work performed at the Customer’s
request is not during the Department’s regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.), or

27


the work performed is in an area designated by the Streets Department as a special work
zone, shall be as follows:
SLEEVE

3” & 4”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$27,425
30,515
33,525
49,900
59,310
6” & 8”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$27,710
30,055
33,525
52,605
65,550
10” & 12”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”

$27,765
31,315
33,525
53,605
69,425

(4) Where a connection is made to a water main 48” or larger in diameter, the charge
will be that for a connection to a 36” main, stated above in Sections 6.7(d)(2) or (3), plus
an additional charge representing the difference between the current cost of a 36” sleeve
and the cost of the larger sleeve. The additional charge shall be paid before any permit
can be issued as prescribed below in Section 6.11.
(e) Should police assistance for traffic control be required for a ferrule or valve
connection, the Customer shall pay the required fee to the Police Department.
6.8 Discontinuance of Water.

28


Except as otherwise provided, no Customer shall be relieved of the obligation to pay water
and sewer charges unless a permit for the discontinuance of water and sewer has been
obtained from the Department of Licenses and Inspections pursuant to the provisions of
Philadelphia Code section 19-1601. When a permit is granted to discontinue water and
sewer service, charges shall terminate on the date of removal of the meter by the
Department. The charge for a permit for discontinuance of water is one hundred dollars
($100), regardless of service size. A validly issued permit to discontinue water and sewer
does not terminate the obligation to pay for stormwater management services.
6.9 Hydrant Permits.
(a) A permit shall be obtained from the Water Permit section of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections before a hydrant can be used. The permit shall contain the terms
and conditions that are required of the Customer in order for the Customer to use the
hydrant.
(b) The costs for obtaining a permit shall be as follows.
(1) One Week Permit for use of standard pressure hydrant…….…$ 2,245
(2) Six Month Permit for use of standard pressure hydrant…..…$ 12,345
6.10 Flow Tests.
When a Customer requests the Department to conduct a flow test on a fire hydrant to
determine the volume and residual pressure available on a domestic or fire connection, or
at a specific location, the charge shall be six hundred and sixty-five dollars ($665) for each
flow test.
6.11 Water Service Line Investigations and/or Inspections
When a Customer or a duly authorized representative of a Customer requests the
Department to conduct an investigation to locate and/or to inspect the water service line at
a specific location, the charge shall be one hundred and sixty-five dollars ($165) for each
investigation or inspection. The charge shall be assessed regardless of the result of the
investigation or inspection.
6.12 Payment.
All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
7.0 MISCELLANEOUS SEWER CHARGES

29


Charges for miscellaneous sewer services supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be
effective September 1, 2025, as follows.
7.1

Sewer Charges for Groundwater.

(a) Sewer charges for groundwater discharged to the City's sewer system shall be as
follows:
(1) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the rate shall be $16.05 per 1,000
cubic feet.
(b) To determine the quantity of such discharged groundwater, the Customer shall install a
meter or measuring device satisfactory to the Department. If, in the opinion of the
Department, it is not feasible to install a meter or measuring device, the Department may
designate some other method of measuring or estimating the quantity of discharged
groundwater.
7.2 Charges for Wastewater Service.
(a) The charge for sanitary type wastewater delivered to any of the City's Water Pollution
Control Plants shall be as follows.
(1) Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the rate shall be $74.51 per 1,000
gallons.
(b) Where accurate quantities of wastewater delivered cannot be determined, such
quantities shall be estimated for billing purposes by such fair and reasonable methods as
shall be approved by the Water Commissioner.
(c) The locations, times, delivery procedures and exact nature of the pollution
characteristics of the delivered wastewater shall be determined by the Department.
(d) From time to time, Customers shall be required to file with the Department a
questionnaire establishing or revising information on the quantity and quality of
wastewater delivered and other pertinent data deemed necessary by the Department.
Failure to furnish such information shall be sufficient grounds for denial or termination of
delivery privileges.
(e) Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of delivered wastewater shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF).

30


(f) If any bill for the above services shall remain unpaid for more than sixty (60) days
from date rendered, the Department may refuse acceptance of additional wastewater until
all unpaid balances, with late charges, are paid in full.
7.3

Wastewater Discharge Permit.

All Industrial Users contributing wastewater to the City's sewer system must obtain a
permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in Chapter 5
of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is five thousand
three hundred and eighty-five dollars ($5,385).
7.4

Groundwater Discharge Permit.

All Industrial Users contributing groundwater to the City’s sewer system must obtain a
permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations contained in
Chapter 5 of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is three
thousand two hundred and fifty dollars ($3,250).
7.5 Manhole Pump-out Permit
(a) Any non-domestic User discharging wastewater from underground structures to the
City’s sewer system must obtain a manhole pump-out permit from the Department
pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in Chapter 5 of the Department’s
regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is three thousand one hundred and
seventy-five dollars ($3,175).
(b) In the event a User requests discharge locations in the City’s separate sewer areas
under this permit, the City may assess additional fees for any work associated with the
review of this request and the identification of the discharge locations.
7.6

Trucked or Hauled Wastewater Permit

Any person trucking or hauling wastewater to the POTW must first obtain a septage
discharge permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in
Chapter 5 of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit shall
be two thousand two hundred and fifty-five dollars ($2,255).
7.7

PHOTOGRAPHIC & VIDEO INSPECTION

When a Customer or a duly authorized representative of a Customer requests the
Department to conduct a photographic or video inspection of a private sewer line at a
specific location, the charge shall be two hundred and seventy five dollars ($275) for each
photographic or video inspection. The charge shall be assessed regardless of the result of
the photographic or video inspection.
7.8

Payment.

31


All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
8.0 MISCELLANEOUS PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION CHARGES
8.1 Stormwater Plan Review and Inspection Fees.
All Development plans submitted to the Department under Chapter 6 of the Department's
regulations for stormwater management approvals shall be subject to a plan review fee.
(a) Fees.
(1) A fee of one thousand seven hundred and sixty-five dollars ($1,765) shall be
due upon submission of the Conceptual Stormwater Management Plan for review.
(2) A fee of two hundred and fifty-five dollars ($255) per hour of review time
shall be due prior to issuance of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan
approval.
(i) Review time shall be based on the City’s tabulation of actual hours
expended by Department employees or consultants reviewing the plans associated with a
particular development project for compliance with Chapter 6 of the Department’s
regulations.
(3) A fee of four hundred and five dollars ($405) for the final inspection of a
development project to confirm compliance with Chapter 6 of the Department’s
regulations shall be due prior to issuance of the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan approval.
(4) A fee is applicable when a reinspection of a site determines that a previously
found violation of Erosion and Sediment (E&S) control requirements has not been
corrected. Fees for subsequent inspections for a site found to be in continuing noncompliance shall be assessed as follows:
(i) Second Reinspection - one hundred and five dollars ($105)
(ii) Third Reinspection - two hundred and ten dollars ($210),
(a) Fourth and Any Subsequent Reinspection – three hundred and fifteen dollars
($315).
(b) Refund of fees. The Department shall refund any fees specified above if a plan
submittal is not approved or denied within 21 days for conceptual site plans and within 45
days for technical site plans.

32


8.2 Stormwater Management Fee in Lieu.
The fee in lieu shall be calculated as follows:
(a) For an exemption to only the Water Quality Requirement of Chapter 6 of the
Department’s regulations the fee in lieu shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per square
foot based on the total Directly Connected Impervious Area within the limit of
Earth Disturbance.
8.3 Utility Plan Review Fees.
All Utility Plans submitted to the Department to receive building permit approval in
accordance with Administrative Code Section A-305.2.1.6 shall be subject to a plan
review fee.
(a) A fee of three hundred and fifty dollars ($350) shall be due upon submission of the
Utility Plan for review.
(b) Parcels that qualify as Community Garden pursuant to Section 19-1603 of the
Philadelphia Code are exempt from the Utility Plan Review Fee.
9.0 FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS
Fire service connection charges shall consist of a monthly service charge and a quantity
charge and shall be effective September 1, 2025, as follows.
9.1 Charges.
(a) Monthly Service Charges.
(1) The monthly service charges for the furnishing of water for the purpose of fire
protection effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, shall be as follows:
Connection Size

Service Charge

Up through 4-inch
6-inch
8-inch
10-inch
12-inch

$ 33.25
62.50
95.17
139.31
228.13

(b) The City may permit fire service connections to its water system outside the City of
Philadelphia only in properties contiguous to the City where in the opinion of the Water

33


Commissioner water service for fire protection may be furnished without interference with
water service to properties within the City.
(c) Pipe connections to the Philadelphia water system, meters and other service
requirements shall be in accordance with the standard fire service requirements of the
Department.
(d) Quantity Charges.
(1) In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each bill is
determined by applying the quantity charge rate shown below to all water use. In
addition, the quantity charge will also include a TAP Rate Rider Surcharge, as set forth in
Section 10.
Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the quantity charge shall be as follows:
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons
Monthly Water
Usage
First 2 Mcf
(0 to 2 Mcf)
Next 98 Mcf
(2.1 to 100 Mcf)
Next 1,900 Mcf
(100.1 to 2,000 Mcf)
Over 2,000 Mcf

Base Charge
Per Mcf
$71.22

TAP-R
Per Mcf
$3.59

Total Charge
Per Mcf
$74.81

63.61

3.59

67.20

49.38

3.59

52.97

48.03

3.59

51.62

Note: Actual TAP-R rates are subject to Annual Reconciliation and the determination of the
Rate Board.
(e) The provisions in this Section apply to all fire service connections.
9.2

Payment.

All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
10.0 PROVISIONS FOR RECOVERY OF THE TIERED ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM (TAP) COSTS
The lost revenue related to TAP (the “TAP Costs”) will be recovered via a separate TAP
Rate Rider Surcharge Rate (TAP-R), which would be added to the water, fire service and

34


sewer quantity charge rate schedules. This TAP-R shall be increased or decreased for the
next rate period to reflect changes in TAP costs, and will be calculated and reconciled on
an annual basis in the manner set forth below.
10.1 Computation of the TAP-R
(a) The TAP-R Equation
The TAP-R shall be computed to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar per MCF
($0.01/MCF) in accordance with the formula set forth below:
TAP-R = (C) – (E + I)
S
The TAP-R so computed, shall be applied as an adder to the water, fire service connection
and sewer quantity charge base rate schedules set forth for water in Section 2.1 (c); sewer
in Section 3.3 (b); and fire service in Section 9.1 (d), of these Rates and Charges. As a
result, the TAP-R shall consist of two sub-components:
(1) A “Water TAP-R” added to the water and fire service quantity “base rate”
($/MCF); and
(2) A “Sewer TAP-R” added to the sewer quantity “base rate” ($/MCF).
During the rate periods that TAP-R is effective, to recover the TAP Costs through Water
TAP-R and the Sewer TAP-R respectively, the total TAP Costs determined for a given
rate period will be apportioned between water and wastewater utilities based on the
proportion of water and wastewater net revenue requirement respectively to total net
revenue requirement. The percent allocation of TAP Costs between water and wastewater
utilities will be as follows:
(i)

Water TAP Cost Allocation: 43%

(ii)

Sewer TAP Cost Allocation: 57%

(b) Definitions
In computing the TAP-R pursuant to the formula above, the following definitions shall
apply:
(1) TAP-R - TAP Rate Rider Surcharge Rate ($/MCF).
(2) C – Cost in dollars of the estimated TAP Billing Loss for the projected period.

35


(3) E - The net over or under collection of the TAP-R surcharge amount for the Most
Recent Period. The net over or under collection will be calculated by comparing
the actual TAP Revenue Loss (resulting from discounts provided to TAP
Customers) with the actual TAP-R surcharge amounts billed to Non-TAP
Customers. Both the TAP Revenue Loss and the TAP-R billings, that are
determined for the rate periods, will be adjusted for collections by applying the
Department’s system-wide collection factor of 96.93%.
(4) I - Interest on any over or under recovery of the TAP-R for the Most Recent
Period. Interest will be computed on a monthly basis using a simple annual interest
rate. The interest rate will be based upon the yield to maturity of a particular date
of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity for a 1-year Treasury
as complied and published in the Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519)
for the United States Treasury1, as it exists each year as of the first day of the
month, preceding the month of the annual reconciliation submission to the Rate
Board.
(5) S - Projected sales in MCF for Non-TAP customers.
(6) Most Recent Period – The Current Fiscal Year and/or the period for which TAPR reconciliation is performed.
(7) Next Rate Period – The fiscal year and/or the period that immediately follows the
Most Recent Period, and in which the TAP-R is effective.
10.2 Filing with the Philadelphia Water, Sewer and Storm Water Rate Board
The Water Department shall initiate the annual TAP Rate Rider Reconciliation by filing
an advance notice with the Philadelphia Water, Sewer and Storm Water Rate Board (the
“Rate Board”) and City Council in accordance with the procedures and standards
established by the Rate Board through its regulations.
10.3 TAP-R Surcharge Rates
(a) Water TAP-R
The Water TAP-R portion of each water bill is determined by applying the Water TAP-R
surcharge rate shown below to all water use.
1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
1

Currently available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/.

36


(1)

Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the Water TAP-R surcharge shall
be $3.59 per Mcf as determined by the annual reconciliation filing.

(b) Sewer TAP-R
The Sewer TAP-R portion of each sewer bill is determined by applying the Sewer TAP-R
surcharge rate shown below to all water use.
1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
(1)

Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the Sewer TAP-R surcharge shall
be $5.07 per Mcf as determined by the annual reconciliation filing.

37


Effective: September 1, 2026
PHILADELPHIA WATER DEPARTMENT
RATES AND CHARGES
Effective: September 1, 2026.
1.0 DEFINITIONS.
(a) Condominium Properties: Real estate, portions of which are designated for separate
ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership by the owners
of those portions. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the
common elements are vested in the unit owners.
(b) Customer: An owner, Tenant or occupant who by operation of law or agreement is
responsible for payment of the charges for water/sewer/stormwater service at a
Residential, Non-residential or Condominium Property.
(c) Department: The Philadelphia Water Department is the operating department of the
City of Philadelphia with the duties, powers and obligations set forth in the Home Rule
Charter and the Philadelphia Code.
(d) Dwelling Unit: A single unit within a building providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking, and sanitation.
(e) Home Rule Charter: The Philadelphia Home Rule Charter, as codified in Pennsylvania
First Class City Home Rule Act, April 21, 1949 P.L. 665, 351 Pa. Code §1-100 et seq.
(f) Mcf: Thousand cubic feet. The quantity charges in Sections 2, 3, 9 and 10 are
expressed in Mcf.
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons
(g) Municipal Stormwater System: City owned and maintained real property,
infrastructure or natural feature used and/or constructed for purposes of transporting,
conveying, retaining, detaining, or discharging stormwater runoff.
(h) Non-residential Property: Real estate which cannot be classified as either Residential
or Condominium. Real estate used exclusively as a cemetery shall not be considered Nonresidential property.
(i) Philadelphia Code: The body of laws and regulations enacted by the Philadelphia City
Council.


(j) Philadelphia Department of Records: An operating department of the City of
Philadelphia with the duties, powers and obligations set forth in the Home Rule Charter
and the Philadelphia Code.
(k) Property: Any parcel of real estate identified in the records of the Philadelphia
Department of Records.
(l) Property Owner: The owner of the particular parcel of real estate identified in the
records of the Philadelphia Department of Records, or the grantee in a land transfer of
record.
(m) Residential Property: Real estate used exclusively for residential purposes with at
least one and no more than four Dwelling Units and which cannot be classified as
Condominium Property. Property adjacent to Residential Property owned and utilized
exclusively by the Residential Property owner for residential uses. Upon proof submitted
to the Department, said properties shall be deemed by the Department to form one
Residential parcel comprised of the Property and the Residential Property.
(n) Stormwater Management Practice (SMP): Any man-made structure that is designed
and constructed to detain, infiltrate, or otherwise control stormwater runoff quality, rate,
or quantity.
(o) Surface Discharge: The discharge of stormwater runoff from a property to an adjacent
surface water body, without the use of City infrastructure.
(p) Undeveloped Property: Property classified by the Board of Revision of Taxes as SB,
SC, SI, SR, or SS; Undeveloped refers to the status of the property as having no structures
and is not related to whether the property has ever been developed.
(q) Water Commissioner: The Water Commissioner of the City of Philadelphia who
performs the duties and obligations as set forth in the Philadelphia Home Rule Charter and
the Philadelphia Code.
(r) Utility Plan: A plan that shows water, sewer, and/or stormwater connections and sizes,
utility locations, and impacts to rights-of-way, the approval of which is required under the
Administrative Code Section A-305.2.1.6.
1.1 Conformity with Existing Law.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to overrule or annul any existing provisions of
the Home Rule Charter or the Philadelphia Code.
1.2 Severability.

2


If any provision, paragraph, word or sections herein is invalidated by any court of
competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words and sections shall not
be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
2.0 WATER CHARGES
Charges for water service supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be effective on
September 1, 2026, as follows:
2.1 General Customers.
Charges for the supplying of water shall be determined and billed as follows:
(a) Charges and billing in general.
(1) Water charges shall consist of a service charge and quantity charge.
(2) A service charge shall be billed monthly.
(3) As set forth in Section 2.1(b), the type and size of the meter shall determine the
service charge.
(4) In addition, there shall be a quantity charge as provided herein for water used in a
monthly billing cycle, either as metered or as estimated.
(5) Quantity charges shall be billed for monthly cycles as provided herein. The cycle
shall be the period between the dates of scheduled metered readings, actual or estimated.
(b) Monthly service charges.
(1) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the monthly service charge for the
various types and sizes of meters shall be as follows:
Size Code Charge
5/8
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2
3
4
6
8
10
12

R
Z
Q
P
X
O
W
N
V
E
T

$ 6.17
7.18
9.62
15.09
22.40
38.64
67.17
130.19
203.33
294.88
517.98

3


Residential Fire Sprinkler System Meters
Size Code Charge
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2

Z
Q
P
X

13.86
16.30
21.77
29.08

(c) Quantity charges
In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each bill is determined by
applying the quantity charge set forth below to all water use. In addition, the quantity
charge will also include a Tiered Assistance Program (TAP) Rate Rider Surcharge, as set
forth in Section 10.
(1) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the quantity charge portion of each
bill shall be as follows:
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons.
Monthly Water
Usage
First 2 Mcf
(0 to 2 Mcf)
Next 98 Mcf
(2.1 to 100 Mcf)
Next 1,900 Mcf
(100.1 to 2,000 Mcf)
Over 2,000 Mcf

Base Charge
Per Mcf
$73.13

TAP-R
Per Mcf
$3.59

Total Charge
Per Mcf
$76.72

68.72

3.59

72.31

53.87

3.59

57.46

52.40

3.59

55.99

Note: Actual TAP-R rates are subject to Annual Reconciliation and the determination of the
Rate Board.
(d) Temporary Transitional Provisions: Some special customers whose charges are now
based on meter size may find that they are in fact 'over-metered' - their metered service is
too large for their actual requirements and results in excessive bills. They may apply for a
downward revision in the size of their meters. After the approval of the Department, the
revision of plumbing arrangements and the installation of smaller meter, the lower charge
by meter size shall apply.

4


3.0 SEWER CHARGES
Charges for sewer service supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be effective on
September 1, 2026, as follows:
3.1 General Customers.
(a) All customers discharging wastewater into the City’s wastewater system shall pay
sewer charges as set forth in Section 3.3. In addition to the charges set forth in Section
3.3, all customers discharging wastewater whose pollutant content is greater than the
pollutant content of Normal Wastewater, as defined below in Section 3.1(b), shall pay an
additional surcharge as set forth in Section 3.4.
(b) Normal Wastewater subject to the regular sewer charges set forth in Section 3.3 is that
wastewater which contains 250 milligrams per liter or less of five day biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD5) and 350 milligrams or less per liter or less of suspended solids (SS).
(c) Wastewater subject to the surcharge set forth in Section 3.4 is that wastewater which
contains either more than 250 milligrams per liter of BOD5 or more than 350 milligrams
per liter of SS, or both.
3.2 Charges.
(a) Sewer charges shall consist of a service charge and a quantity charge.
(b) A service charge shall be billed monthly.
(c) As set forth in Section 3.3(a), the size of the meter shall determine the service charge.
(d) In addition, as set forth in Section 3.3(b), there shall be a quantity charge for sewer
service in a monthly billing cycle, either as metered or as estimated.
(e) Quantity charges shall be billed for monthly cycles as provided herein. The cycle shall
be between the dates of scheduled metered readings, actual or estimated. Quantity charges
imposed shall be based on the water usage of the Property served.
3.3 Regular Sewer Charges.
(a) Monthly service charges shall be determined and billed as follows:
(1) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the monthly service charge for the
various sizes of meters shall be as follows:
Size

Code

Charge

5


5/8
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2
3
4
6
8
10
12

R
Z
Q
P
X
O
W
N
V
E
T

$8.62
11.09
16.39
29.09
44.99
81.37
138.08
272.48
431.54
622.64
1,134.43

Residential Fire Sprinkler System Meters
Size Code Charge
3/4
1
1 -1/2
2

Z
Q
P
X

8.62
8.62
8.62
8.62

(b) Quantity charge
In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each sewer bill is
determined by applying the quantity charge rate shown below to all water use. In
addition, the quantity charge will also include a TAP Rate Rider Surcharge, as set forth in
Section 10.
1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
(1)

Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the quantity charge shall be:
Base Charge
Per Mcf
$49.53

TAP-R
Per Mcf
$5.07

Total Charge
Per Mcf
$54.60

3.4 Surcharge.
(a) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the surcharge for wastewater by definition
in excess of Normal Wastewater shall be fixed at fifty-two and three tenths cents ($0.523)
per pound of pollutants received into the wastewater system in excess of 250 milligrams

6


per liter of BOD5 and fifty-four cents ($0.540) per pound of pollutants received into the
wastewater system in excess of 350 milligrams per liter of SS.
(b) The BOD5 and SS of wastewater shall be determined from samples taken on the
Customer's Property at any period or time and of such duration and in such manner as the
Department may prescribe or at any place mutually agreed upon between the Customer
and the Department. With prior written approval of the Department, the results of routine
sampling and analyses by the Customer may be used in determining the amount of the
surcharge.
(c) If, in the Department's judgment, sampling of wastewater is neither feasible nor
practical, the Department, for billing purposes, may base BOD5 and SS of the wastewater
on sampling results for similar discharge and/or values obtained from technical literature.
(d) Customers discharging wastewater subject to the surcharge shall, as prescribed by the
Department:
(1) Install and maintain such facilities for sampling and measuring the wastewater
discharged from their properties; and
(2) Maintain such records and information deemed necessary for the determination of
the surcharge.
(e) Customers, as required from time to time, shall file with the Department responses to a
questionnaire establishing or revising pertinent information on the quantity of flow and the
quality of wastewater and other data deemed necessary for the determination of the
surcharge.
(f) Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater subject to
surcharge shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF).
(g) The surcharge shall be applied to the total wastewater discharged less any portion
excluded by the Department.
3.5 Sewer Credits.
Pursuant to Section 13-101(6) of the Philadelphia Code, the method of crediting water
users’ sewer bills for City water used but not discharged into the wastewater disposal
system shall be as follows.
(a) Eligibility. Where commercial and industrial facilities that use City water do not
discharge all of such water into the wastewater system, the quantity of such water may be
excluded in determining the proper sewer charge, provided that:

7


(1) at least 5% of water used, or
(2) 225,000 cubic feet per year, whichever is less, is not discharged into the
wastewater system.
(b) Determination of the Amount of Exclusion. To determine the amount of such
exclusion the Customer shall install a meter or measuring device satisfactory to the
Department provided that, if in the opinion of the Department, it is not feasible to install a
meter or measuring device, some other satisfactory method of measuring (“credit factor”)
may be designated by the Department on application of the Customer.
(c) Fee for Application. When the Customer applies to the Department for a
determination on the quantity of water to be excluded by some method other than
metering of the sewer, or re-applies for a revised method measuring a larger quantity of
water to be excluded, there shall be charge of one thousand seven hundred dollars
($1,700) for the review of such application.
(d) Effective Date of Credits and Approved Credit Factors. Credits on a water user’s
sewer bills for quantities of water used but not discharged into the wastewater disposal
system shall be effective from the submission date of an approved application. In order to
be reviewed for approval, applications shall be complete, submitted on forms provided by
the Department and shall be accompanied by a check payable to the City of Philadelphia
in the amount required in Section 3.5(c). No credits shall be made retroactively.
(e) Review of Approved Credit Factors. The Department reserves the right to review
approved credit factors. Customers may, from time to time, be required to submit current
water use and sewer discharge information. Customers may also be required to submit
new applications for the credit factor. Failure to comply with the Department’s requests
for information or new applications may result in termination of the Customer’s credit
factor.
(f) Failure to Inform the Department of Increased Sewer Use. Customers with credit
factors who fail to inform the Department of increased discharges to the wastewater
system shall be subject to the imposition of the full charges for sewer use based on total
water usage from the most recent application date, with applicable interest. In addition,
the Department may impose a fine of six hundred and twenty dollars ($620) for each
billing period from the application date.
4.0 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGES
Charges for Stormwater Management Services (SWMS) supplied by the City of
Philadelphia shall be effective September 1, 2026 as follows:
4.1 Charges.

8


All properties within the City shall be billed a SWMS charge.
4.2 Residential Properties.
All Residential Properties shall be charged a monthly SWMS charge and a monthly
Billing and Collection charge as follows:
(a) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter all Residential Properties shall be charged
the rates listed below:
SWMS
$20.89

Billing & Collection
$2.16

(b) Residential Properties which do not have sewer service and which also have
previously been charged only for water service shall be charged the rates shown above at
4.2 (a).
4.3 Non-Residential Properties.
Non-Residential Properties shall be charged a monthly SWMS charge and a monthly
Billing and Collection charge as follows:
(a) Non-residential Properties shall be charged based on the Gross Area (GA) of the
Property and the Impervious Area (IA) of the Property.
(1) GA includes all of the Property area within the legally described boundaries
except streets, medians, and sidewalks in the public right-of-way and railroad tracks and
station platforms in the railroad right-of-way.
(2) IA includes surfaces which are compacted or covered with material that
restricts infiltration of water, including semi-pervious surfaces such as compacted clay,
most conventionally hard-scaped surfaces such as streets, driveways, roofs, sidewalks,
parking lots, attached and detached structures, and other similar surfaces.
(i) For Non-residential Properties with less than 5,000 square feet GA, the
IA shall be estimated as a percentage of GA.
(A) For Undeveloped Property as defined in Section 1.0, the IA
shall be 25% of the GA.
(B) For other Properties, the IA shall be 85% of the GA.

9


(3) In determining the GA Factor and IA Factor of a Property for the SWMS
charge, the Department shall use increments of 500 square feet rounding up to the next
highest increment.
(4) Calculating the Monthly SWMS charge. The monthly SWMS charge for each
Non-residential Property is calculated by:
(i) dividing the GA in square feet by 500 and rounding up to the next whole
unit to determine the GA Factor, then multiplying the GA Factor by the GA Rate to
determine the GA charge;
(ii) dividing the IA in square feet by 500 and rounding up to the next whole
unit to determine the IA Factor, then multiplying the IA Factor by the IA Rate to
determine the IA charge;
(iii) the addition of the GA charge and the IA Charge equals the SWMS
charge; and
(iv) the addition of the SWMS charge and the Billing and Collection charge
together equals the total monthly stormwater charge.
(5) Rates for GA, IA and Billing and Collection.
(i) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the Rates shall be as
follows:
GA
IA
($/500 s.f.) ($/500 s.f.)
1.003

Billing & Collection

7.048

$2.81

(6) Minimum Monthly Charges. Non-residential Properties shall be subject to a
minimum monthly charge. If the monthly charge calculated in Section 4.3(a)(4) is less
than the monthly charges listed below then the monthly charges below shall be billed to
the Property.
SWMS
$20.89

Billing & Collection
$2.81

(7) Adjustment Appeal Procedure.

10


(i) Customers may appeal the GA and/or IA calculations, property
classification, or charge distribution of their property.
(ii) Adjustments shall be made using forms and procedures as defined by
the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual and sent to:

Philadelphia Water Department
SWMS Charge Appeals
1101 Market Street
4th Floor
Philadelphia, PA 19107-2994
(iii) Adjustments to the GA and/or IA determination are separate and
distinct from the billing review procedures established by Section 19-1702 of the
Philadelphia Code.
(iv) The grounds supporting the adjustment shall be stated in writing, and
include any exhibits, such as photographs, drawings or maps, site plans, and affidavits that
support the claim. In addition, a land survey prepared by a registered surveyor shall be
attached showing all Dwelling Units, total property area, type of surface material and
impervious area, as appropriate, and any other information requested in writing by the
Department. The Department may waive the submission of a land survey, if the
Department determines that the survey is not necessary to make a determination on the
appeal.
(v) The Customer filing the appeal is solely responsible to demonstrate, by
clear and convincing evidence, that the GA and/or IA square footage information used by
the Department, from which the adjustment appeal is being taken, is erroneous.
(vi) The filing of a notice of an adjustment appeal shall not stay the
imposition, calculation or duty to pay the SWMS charge.
(vii) If the adjustment appeal results in a revised GA and/or IA calculation,
correction of property classification, correction of parcel identification, or revisions to the
default charge allocation, then the adjusted SWMS Charge will be effective from the date
of receipt of the Adjustment Appeals Application; except that the Department may authorize
WRB to credit accounts for adjustments to the GA and/or IA calculation for a period not to
exceed three years prior to receipt of the Adjustment Appeals Application if the Customer
filing the appeal demonstrates, by clear and convincing evidence, that it was eligible for and
qualified to receive the adjustment during the three year period prior to the receipt of the
Adjustment Appeals Application was incorrect.
(8) Multiple Accounts Serving One Property. Where there are multiple water
accounts on a single Property, the entire SWMS charge of that Property shall be divided

11


equally among the accounts. Each account shall also be billed a Billing and Collection
charge. Property Owners shall have the opportunity to request an alternative allocation of
the SWMS Charge.
4.4 Condominium Properties.
(a) Condominium Properties shall be charged SWMS and Billing and Collection charges
on the same terms as Non-residential Properties under Section 4.3, but shall be billed as
follows:
(1) Condominium Properties with a single water meter account shall be billed
such that the entire SWMS charge of the condominium complex property plus a Billing
and Collection Charge are billed to that single account.
(2) Condominium Properties with individual water meter accounts for each unit
shall be billed such that the entire SWMS charge of the condominium complex property
shall be divided and billed equally to each individual account. In addition, each account
shall be billed a Billing and Collection Charge.
(3) Condominium Properties with more than one water meter, but without
individual water meters for each unit, shall be billed such that the entire SWMS charge of
the condominium complex property shall be divided equally among the accounts. Each
account shall also be billed a Billing and Collection Charge. The Condominium Owner’s
Association shall have the opportunity to request an alternative allocation of the SWMS
charge.
4.5 SWMS Credits
(a) Eligibility.
(1) Accounts on Non-residential and Condominium properties must be current to
be eligible for credits.
(2) The Customer shall make the Property available for inspection by the
Department and provide all necessary documentation for purposes of verifying the
appropriateness of a SWMS credit(s).
(3) The Customer shall fulfill credit requirements, as described in Section 4.5(c)
below, in accordance with the maintenance guidelines as prescribed by the Department,
including any and all inspection and reporting obligations.
(b) Classes of Credits. There are three classes of credits: IA Credit, GA Credit, and
NPDES Credit. The IA Credit provides a reduction to the IA Charge; the GA Credit
provides a reduction to GA Charge; and the NPDES Credit provides reduction to the total
SWMS Charge. A Property may be approved for credits from each of the three classes;

12


however, if the resulting SWMS Charge after the application of any credits is less than the
Non-residential minimum monthly charge, then the minimum monthly charge will apply.
(c) Credit Requirements.
(1) IA Credit. IA Credit is available for the portion of IA on a property where
stormwater runoff is managed (IA Managed). IA Managed is achieved as follows:
(i) For areas of the property that meet the requirements of the following
Impervious Area Reductions (IAR), as described in the Stormwater Credits and
Adjustment Appeals Manual, a direct reduction in the billable IA may be applied:
(A) Rooftop disconnection,
(B) Pavement disconnection, or
(C) Tree canopy coverage.
(ii) For Properties with PWD-approved Stormwater Management Practices constructed
per Chapter 6 of the Department’s regulations, the customer must demonstrate compliance
with the regulations, including management of the first 1.5 inches of runoff and any and
all required reporting, inspection and maintenance activities, except as otherwise provided
in 4.5(c)(1)(iv).
(iii) For properties with PWD-approved Stormwater Management
Practices, including those constructed with Department stormwater grant funds, the
customer must demonstrate management of the first 1.5” of runoff and SMP compliance
per the approved record drawing and any and all reporting, inspection and maintenance
activities, except as otherwise provided in 4.5(c)(1)(iv).
(iv) The Department may approve a Property for IA credit for Non-Surface
Water Discharges under the credit requirements in effect before September 1, 2021, if the
Department receives a credit application for that Property on or before September 1, 2021.
Such Properties property receiving credit under the credit requirements in effect before
September 1, 2021 may continue to receive the credit under those requirements until the
credit expires. Upon expiration of the credit, the current or future Property Owners of
such Properties may renew the credit under the credit requirements in effect before
September 1, 2021 by submitting a renewal application(s) in accordance with Subsection
4.5(f)(4) unless and until this section is modified.1
(v) For Surface Discharges, the Customer must demonstrate that a portion or
all of the impervious area discharges directly to a surface water body.

1

Prior to September 1, 2021, Customers of Properties with non-Surface Discharges were required to
demonstrate management of the first inch of stormwater runoff in one of the three following ways: (1)
infiltration, (2) detention and slow release, and/or (3) routing through an approved volume -reducing SMP.

13


(2) GA Credit.
(i) Impervious area only. Impervious area shall receive a GA credit based on
the criteria defined in Section 4.5(c)(1)(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) herein.
(ii) Open Space area only. Open Space area is non-impervious area and is
calculated as GA minus IA. The Customer must demonstrate a Natural Resource
Conservation Service Curve Number (NRCS-CN) below a certain value as described
in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(3) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Credit. The Customer
must demonstrate the property is subject to and in compliance with a NPDES Permit for
industrial stormwater discharge activities.
(d) Credit Maximum.
(1)

IA Credit Maximum. IA Credit maximums shall apply as follows:

(i) All Non-residential and Condominium properties are eligible for a
maximum of 80% IA Credit for the IA Managed.
(ii) A Non-residential or Condominium property with Surface Discharge is
eligible for a maximum of 90% IA credit for the IA Managed.
(2)

GA Credit Maximum. GA Credit maximums shall apply as follows:

(i) All Non-residential and Condominium properties are eligible for a
maximum of 80% GA Credit.
(ii) A Non-residential or Condominium property with Surface Discharge is
eligible for a maximum of 90% GA credit.
(3)
NPDES Credit Maximum. Eligible properties shall receive a maximum of
7% NPDES credit as described in the Credit and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(e) Application of Credits
The application of the three classes of credits in calculating a property’s monthly SWMS
charge shall be described in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.
(f) Administration of Credits.
(1) A Customer shall apply for credits using application forms and submitting the
required documentation as defined in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual.

14


(2) Any engineering or other costs incurred in completing the application shall be
borne by the Customer.
(3) Credits shall be effective upon receipt of a complete application.
(4) All credits shall expire four (4) years from the effective date of the credit. A
Customer may renew credits by submitting a renewal application, documentation required
by the Department as defined in the Credits and Adjustment Appeals Manual, and paying
a renewal fee of seven hundred and eighty dollars ($780).
(g) Termination of Credits.
(1) The Department may review any approved credit at any time to verify its
continued applicability. Customers may from time to time be asked to submit
documentation and/or grant access to the Property receiving the credit. Failure to comply
with such requests may result in the termination of the credit(s).
(2) The Customer’s failure to meet credit requirements or comply with inspection
and reporting obligations, in accordance with Section 4.5(a)(3), shall result in a suspension
or revocation of all affected credits pursuant to the procedures issued by the Department.
(h) The Department may, at its sole discretion, issue stormwater credits to individual
parcels where stormwater management is being implemented on a shared, collective basis
by an organization representing different parcel owners within a defined geographic area.
5.0 BILLING FOR WATER, SEWER AND STORMWATER SERVICE
5.1 Billing.
(a) Estimated Usage and Billing. When an accurate meter reading cannot be obtained at
the time of a scheduled meter reading or when necessary for administrative purposes, the
quantity of water used may be estimated for billing purposes. Estimated usage will be
based upon actual meter readings from prior cycles or by such other fair and reasonable
methods as shall be approved by the Water Commissioner. Where the water usage is
estimated because of inability to read the meter, any necessary corrections shall be made
at the time of the next actual meter reading, or when appropriate.
(b) Charges to be Combined. At the discretion of the Water Commissioner, each bill may
combine in one amount the service charge and any quantity charges for water, sewer and
stormwater, if applicable.
(c) Bills Due and Payable. All bills are due and payable when rendered.
(d) Penalties for Late Payments.

15


(1) If current water, sewer, and stormwater bills are not paid within thirty (30) days
from the date indicated on the bill, a penalty of five percent (5%) shall be imposed.
(2) An additional penalty of one half of one percent (0.5%) shall be imposed and
added to water, sewer, and stormwater bills on the due date of the bill of each succeeding
cycle, except that a period of thirty (30) days shall elapse before the first additional penalty
is imposed.
(3) If any water, sewer, and stormwater bill remains unpaid for two cycles after the
bill has been rendered, the Revenue Department shall serve a notice of termination upon
the delinquent Property Owner and, if the charge, with penalties thereon, is not paid within
ten (10) days after such service of notice, the Department, in its discretion, may suspend
water service to the Property until the charge with penalties is paid. Penalties for late
payment are set by ordinance, not by regulation, and any amendments to the current
ordinance shall apply as provided therein.
(e) Balance Due. Each bill shall include any balances due for bills issued from October 1,
2000, including penalties.
(f) Changes in Meter Size. When a change in meter size is made, the charge for the new
meter size shall become effective on the date of such change.
(g) Unmetered Customers.
(1) Unmetered Customers shall be billed the same charges established for metered
Customers. The water and sewer service charges will be determined by the size of the
meter which would be installed for an equivalent service at a similar property. The
SWMS charges will be determined based on Section 4.0. The Revenue Department shall
estimate the quantity of water used and bill accordingly using the applicable water and
sewer quantity charges.
(2) Where unmetered wastewater is discharged to the sewer system without
adequate sewer metering, the Department reserves the right to bill the amount of flow
based upon its engineering judgment of a reasonable estimate of unmetered usage.
(h) Unoccupied Property.
The billing of unoccupied Properties for water and sewer shall be discontinued only on
issuance of a Discontinuance of Water permit. Nothing in this Section shall relieve a
Property Owner of his responsibility for maintaining a service line unless a
Discontinuance of Water permit has been secured. Under no circumstances will the
stormwater service charge be terminated.
(i) Extraordinary Uses or Appliances.

16


In the event that extraordinary or peculiar uses or appliances, in the opinion of the Water
Commissioner, warrant a special charge not provided herein, such charges shall be as
fixed by the Water Commissioner in writing.
5.2 Special Customers.
The water, sewer and stormwater management service charges established in Sections 2.0
et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq. shall be applied to all general Customers, except the
following groups of special Customers:
(a) GROUP I
(1) Public and private schools which provide instruction up to or below the twelfth
grade but not beyond that grade, and excluding service to any separate or adjoining
facilities or structures not used exclusively for educational or instructional purposes.
(2) Institutions of “purely public charity”, as defined by the Charity Water Rates and
Charges Program Regulations in Chapter 2 of the Department’s regulations, except
universities and colleges and excluding service to any separate or adjoining facilities or
structures not used exclusively for the principal purpose of the charity.
(3) Places used for actual religious worship.
(b) GROUP II
(1) Residences of eligible senior citizens provided that the senior citizen shall:
(i) Make application for such reduction to the Revenue Department within
the first billing period for which reduction is sought; and
(ii) Submit satisfactory proof that the applicant is 65 years of age or older
and that he or she makes payment directly to the City for water, sewer, and stormwater
service to his or her residence which is located in the City of Philadelphia; and
(iii) Submit satisfactory proof to the Revenue Department that the applicant
does not exceed the household income limitation of $42,100 per year established by the
Department. The above income limitation shall apply to those applying for this discount
subsequent to June 30, 1982.
(iv) Effective with each subsequent general rate change in the
water/sewer/stormwater charges, the Department shall adjust the Senior Citizen Income
Limitation using the latest Consumer Price Index data available, as defined in the
Philadelphia Code at Section 19-1901.
(c) GROUP III

17


(1) Universities and colleges, excluding service to any separate or adjoining facilities
or structures not used exclusively for educational or instructional purposes.
(d) GROUP IV
(1) Public housing properties of the Philadelphia Housing Authority.
(e) GROUP V
(1) Group V Customers are Customers enrolled in the Income-Based Water Revenue
Assistance Program (IWRAP) described in Section 19-1605 of the Philadelphia Code after
the Water Revenue Bureau begins to issue IWRAP bills. Monthly bills for a Customer
enrolled in IWRAP will be determined based on the Customer’s family size and household
income and will be charged in lieu of the service, usage and stormwater charges
established in Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq. and 4.0 et seq. for general Customers. Group
V Customers will pay a percentage of his/her household income depending on where that
Customer falls within the Federal Poverty Guidelines (FPL), subject to a minimum bill
amount of $12 per month.
(2) For determining the amount of service, usage and stormwater charges on monthly
bills, Group V Customers will be defined according to three income tiers as follows:
(i) Group V-A. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being from 0% of FPL and up to and including 50% of FPL
(ii) Group V-B. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being greater than 50% of FPL and up to and including 100% of FPL.
(iii) Group V-C. Group V Customers whose gross household income has been
verified as being greater than 100% of FPL and up to and including 150% of FPL.
(f) GROUP VI
(1) Customers with parcels eligible for a discount from the stormwater
management service charge as a qualified Community Garden pursuant to Section 191603 of the Philadelphia Code and regulations promulgated by the Water Department
under that Section.
(g) GROUP VII
(1) All unoccupied properties of the Philadelphia Land Bank.
(h) Charges for Special Customers

18


(1) As of September 1, 2021, the charges to Groups I, II, and III of special
Customers listed above shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the charges as established
in Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq., including both the water and sewer
service and quantity charges, and the SWMS charges. The charges to Group IV
Customers shall be ninety-five percent (95%) of the charges as established in Sections 2.0
et seq., 3.0 et seq., and 4.0 et seq., including both the water and sewer service and quantity
charges, and the SWMS charges.
(2) Group V Customers enrolled in IWRAP after the Water Revenue Bureau
begins to issue IWRAP bills will be responsible for paying the following charges for
service, usage and stormwater charges, or $12 per month, whichever is greater:
(i) Group V-A: 2.0% of household income.
(ii) Group V-B: 2.5% of household income.
(iii) Group V-C: 3% of household income.
(3) Group VI: Effective with bills issued on or after January 1, 2017, Group VI
special Customers will receive a 100% discount on the stormwater management service
charges for parcels classified by the Department as Community Gardens upon approval of
an application for a discount consistent with Section 19-1603 of the Philadelphia Code and
regulations promulgated by the Department under that Section.
(4) Group VII: Effective with bills issued on or after September 1, 2018, Group VII
special Customers are fully exempt from all water, sewer and stormwater management
rates and charges.
(i) All of these special Customers shall meter all water connections and they shall be
subject to all provisions herein not inconsistent with Sections 2.0 et seq., 3.0 et seq., and
4.0 et seq.
(j) All special Customers are subject at any time to review as to their special charges by
the Department or the Water Revenue Bureau and may be required to furnish adequate
evidence supporting the continuance of such charges to the Department or the Water
Revenue Bureau upon written notice to do so. Failure to furnish such evidence shall be
sufficient ground for denial or termination of such special charges.
(k) Special charges may be granted subject to the Department's review and approval of the
size of the meter installed.
(l) When the special use for which the special charge is granted ceases, the special charge
ceases and the charges for general Customers shall apply thereafter.

19


(m) When any vacant or unoccupied premises are acquired by the City, charges for water
and sewer, including charges relating to storm water management and disposal, shall
terminate on the date that such premises are acquired.
(n) When any property is acquired or held by the Philadelphia Housing Development
Corporation or acquired or held by the City or the Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
Chapters 16-400 or 16-500 of the Philadelphia Code, charges for water and sewer,
including charges relating to storm water management and disposal, shall be abated.
5.3 Eligibility for Charity Rates and Charges.
The Department has promulgated regulations to manage the eligibility for and
administration of Charity Rates and Charges.
5.4 Account Review.
The Department, from time to time, may review the status of organizations receiving
Charity Rates and Charges.
During this review, eligible organizations may be required to submit new applications.
5.5 No Waiver.
Nothing herein shall limit the Department on its own findings or at the request of another
City agency from suspending Charity Rates and Charges from organizations which have
violated City law or regulations and thereby under such City law or regulations have
forfeited such privileges as the Charity Rates and Charges.
6.0 MISCELLANEOUS WATER CHARGES
Charges for miscellaneous water services supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall
become effective September 1, 2026 as follows:
6.1 Meter Test Charges.
(a) A Customer may apply to the Department for a test of the accuracy of the registration
of a water meter (Meter Test). At the Customer’s request, the Department shall notify the
Customer of the time and place of the test so that the Customer may be present.
(b) In testing, meters may be removed from the line and replaced by a tested meter. If
removed, the meter shall be tested at the Department’s Meter Shop. Meters may also be
tested and recalibrated in place without removal and replacement.

20


(c) All meters shall be removed, replaced, tested or calibrated during the Department’s
regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.).
(d) A Customer may request a Meter Test to be performed outside the regular business
hours of the Department under the following conditions:
(1) the Department has staff available and agrees to a time outside the regular
business hours of the Department; and,
(2) the Customer agrees to pay the overtime and added expenses, whether the
meter passes or fails the test.
(e) If the register on the meter is found upon testing to be registering within two percent
(2%) of the actual volume of water passing through the meter, or registering in favor of
the Customer, the Customer will be assessed a Meter Test Charge as follows:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”

$170

1”, 1-1/2”, 2”

$230

3”, 4”, 6”, 8”, 10”, 12”
$440
---------------------------------------------Field Tests, 3” and above
$440
(plus any charges and/or expenses incurred for work performed outside the regular hours
of business, if requested by the Customer).
(f) If the meter is found upon testing to be registering in excess of 102% of the actual
volume of water passing through the meter, the Customer shall not be assessed a Meter
Test charge as provided for in subsection (e); and, WRB shall review the billing history of
the tested meter for a period not to exceed three years on the basis of the corrected
registration and revise it as necessary.
(g) The Department will, at the request of a Customer, test his or her meter at no charge
once every twenty years. Additional tests are subject to the charges listed in Section
6.1(e).
6.2 Charges for Furnishing and Installation of Water Meters.
The charges for furnishing and installing water meters are as follows.
(a) For work which involves the furnishing and setting of a water meter and meter
interface unit (MIU), the following charges are hereby established:

21


Meter Size

Charge

5/8”
¾ RFSS
1”
1” RFSS
11/2”
1 1/2” RFSS
2”
2” RFSS
3” Compound
3” Turbine
3” Fire Series
4” Compound
4” Turbine
4” Fire Series
4” Fire Assembly
6” Compound
6” Turbine
6” Fire Series
6” Fire Assembly
8” Turbine
8” Fire Series
8” Fire Assembly
10” Turbine
10” Fire Series
10” Fire Assembly
12” Turbine
12” Fire Series
12” Fire Assembly

$360
610
510
630
1,385
1,180
1,385
1,430
4,730
2,315
4,680
6,280
3,720
6,190
8,720
9,410
7,070
8,245
13,730
8,430
10,810
17,700
12,135
13,355
25,655
12,985
16,970
27,340

(b) For work which involves only the furnishing and setting of an MIU, the following
charges are hereby established:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”
¾” RFSS
1”
1 ” RFSS
1 1/2”
1 ½” RFSS
2”
2” RFSS
3” Compound
3” Turbine

$ 105
105
155
155
155
155
155
155
355
355

22


4” Compound
4” Turbine
6” Compound
6” Turbine
8”
10”

355
355
355
355
355
355

(c) If extraordinary work is required in connection with the installation of a water meter
or the replacement of a damaged meter, additional charges shall be computed using actual
salaries and materials expended, plus applicable overhead costs.
(d) The Property Owner shall be responsible for safeguarding the meter and seals and
shall pay for necessary repairs and replacements due to his/her failure to provide adequate
protection to the meter and seals from theft, vandalism, freezing, tampering or other
damage. The Property Owner shall also be responsible for the repair and maintenance of
the plumbing accessory to the meter, such as inoperable valves, weakened service pipes
and fittings, etc. and shall provide and pay for such plumbing, repair and maintenance as
City metering needs may require.
6.3 Tampering of Meter.
(a) In the event that an investigation indicates that tampering of a meter has occurred, the
following charges to the Customer shall be assessed:
Meter Size

Charge

5/8”or 3/4”
1”, 1½”, 2”
3” and larger

$ 120
170
390

6.4 Shut-Off and Restoration of Water Service.
(a) If the Department is required to visit a Property to shut off service for non-payment;
and, payment is tendered at the time of the shut-off, a charge of one hundred dollars
($105) will be assessed, with the exception stated in Section 6.4(e).
(b) A one hundred dollar ($105) charge will be assessed if shut-off of the water service is
required as a result of non-compliance with a Notice of Defect and/or metering noncompliance.
(c) After termination of water service for non-payment or violation of service
requirements, restoration of water service will not be made until the following charges
have been paid in full or payment arrangements satisfactory to the Revenue Department
have been made.
(1) Where the only work required is operating the service valve:

23


(i) service lines 2” and smaller.....................................................................$105
with the exception stated in Section 6.4(e)
(ii) service lines larger than 2”………… ..............................................…...$400
(2) Where the curb stop is obstructed, the access box missing or otherwise requires
excavation .....................................................................................................................$825
(3) Where the curb stop is inoperable and a new curb stop must be installed ...$865
(4) Where the curb stop is obstructed, the access box missing, or otherwise
requires excavation, and replacement of footway paving is required ............................$835
(5) Where the curb stop is inoperable and a new curb box must be installed and
replacement of footway paving is required ....................................................................$875
(6) Where excavation and shut-off of the ferrule at the water main is required
.....................................................................................................................................$1,680
(d) If the Department is required to remove concrete footway paving in order to perform
the shut-off and/or restoration, the footway will be replaced by the Department and the
preceding charges applied unless proof has been provided to the Department that some
other qualified person will replace the paving.
(e) A charge of $12 will be assessed if a Customer is enrolled in IWRAP and the
Department is required to visit the Property to:
(1) shut off service for non-payment; and, payment is tendered at the time of the
shut-off; or
(2) restore water service after termination of water service for non-payment or
violation of service requirements.
6.5 Pumping of Properties.
The following charges shall apply for the pumping of water from properties when the
condition requiring such service is not caused by the Department.
(a) Occupied Properties
(1) Pumping of water from occupied Properties may be done at the Property
Owner's request and expense.

24


(2) Pumping of other Properties due to the failure of a Property Owner’s piping
may be performed by the Department and be charged to the Property Owner of the
Property at which the failure occurred.
(3) Charges for pumping shall be calculated at actual salaries and materials
expended, plus applicable overhead costs.
(b) Unoccupied Properties
The Department may, at its sole and exclusive discretion, pump water from unoccupied
properties if it is determined that a serious condition exists. The charges for pumping
shall be as specified in Section 6.5(a).
6.6 Charges for Water Main Shutdown.
(a) The Department of Licenses and Inspections shall issue permits for the temporary
shutdown of a water main to allow a registered plumber to make immediate repairs to a
broken water service and to avoid the necessity of opening the street.
(b) Permits shall be issued after:
(1) Certification by the Department that the shutdown will not seriously
inconvenience other Customers; and
(2) The applicant has paid a three hundred and sixty dollar ($375) service charge.
(c) In an emergency or when responsibility for a leak is in doubt, the Department may
make the shutdown before the permit is obtained. If the Department determines that the
leak was not the Department's responsibility, the owner shall obtain a permit and pay the
above stated service charge and any other costs incurred by the Department in conducting
the emergency shut down.
6.7 Water Connection Charges.
(a) Permits. Permits for connections to the City's water supply system shall be issued by
the Water Permit section of the Department of Licenses and Inspections.
(b) Ferrule Connections.
(1) Connections between 3/4 inch and two inches (2”) in diameter shall be made
by a ferrule installed by the Department. The owner, at his own expense, shall excavate
for the connection, install all piping and appurtenances after the ferrule and fill the
excavation. The owner thereafter shall be responsible for maintaining this piping and
appurtenance.

25


(2) The charges for such ferrule connections, with the exception stated in Section
6.7(b)(3), shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

¾”
1”
1½”
2”

$245
280
345
455

(3) The charges for such ferrule connections, when the work performed at the
Customer’s request is not during the Department’s regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to
4:45 p.m.), shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

¾”
1”
1½”
2”

$270
305
370
480

(c) Valve Connections. Connections three inches (3”) and larger shall be made by a valve
installed by the Department. This valve installation shall include, but shall not necessarily
be limited to, the connection to the main, the valve, valve box, necessary piping after the
valve from the main in the street to one foot inside the curb, backfill and repaving. The
Department shall thereafter be responsible for maintaining this valve and piping, unless
the associated meter has been reduced at the Property Owner’s request to a two inch (2”)
or smaller meter, in which case the Property Owner shall be responsible for valve and
piping maintenance.
(1) The charges for valve connections shall, with the exceptions stated in Section
6.7(c)(2), shall be as follows:
Size
3" & 4”
6” & 8”
10” & 12”

Charge
$14,950
16,205
19,890

(2) The charge for such valve connections, when the work is performed at the
Customer’s request is during other than normal work hours or the work is performed in an
area designated by the Streets Department as a special work zone, shall be as follows:
Size

Charge

26


3” & 4”
6” & 8”
10” & 12”

$17,115
18,370
22,055

(d) Attachment to a Transmission Main
(1) There shall be no connection to a transmission main without Department
approval. Such approval shall be requested by application forms and procedures issued by
the Department.
(2) Where a connection is made to a water main larger than 12 inches in diameter,
with the exceptions stated in Sections 6.7(d)(3)&(4), the charges will be a follows:
SLEEVE

3” & 4”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$26,060
29,370
32,590
50,110
60,180
6” & 8”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$26,365
28,880
32,590
53,005
66,855
10” & 12”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”

$26,430
30,225
32,590
54,075
71,005

(3) The charges for such connections, when the work performed at the Customer’s
request is not during the Department’s regular business hours (9:00 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.), or

27


the work performed is in an area designated by the Streets Department as a special work
zone, shall be as follows:
SLEEVE

3” & 4”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$28,770
32,075
35,300
52,820
62,890
6” & 8”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”
SLEEVE

$29,075
31,585
35,300
55,715
69,560
10” & 12”

MAIN
16”
20”
24”
30”
36”

$29,135
32,935
35,300
56,785
73,710

(4) Where a connection is made to a water main 48” or larger in diameter, the charge
will be that for a connection to a 36” main, stated above in Sections 6.7(d)(2) or (3), plus
an additional charge representing the difference between the current cost of a 36” sleeve
and the cost of the larger sleeve. The additional charge shall be paid before any permit
can be issued as prescribed below in Section 6.11.
(e) Should police assistance for traffic control be required for a ferrule or valve
connection, the Customer shall pay the required fee to the Police Department.
6.8 Discontinuance of Water.

28


Except as otherwise provided, no Customer shall be relieved of the obligation to pay water
and sewer charges unless a permit for the discontinuance of water and sewer has been
obtained from the Department of Licenses and Inspections pursuant to the provisions of
Philadelphia Code section 19-1601. When a permit is granted to discontinue water and
sewer service, charges shall terminate on the date of removal of the meter by the
Department. The charge for a permit for discontinuance of water is one hundred dollars
($100), regardless of service size. A validly issued permit to discontinue water and sewer
does not terminate the obligation to pay for stormwater management services.
6.9 Hydrant Permits.
(a) A permit shall be obtained from the Water Permit section of the Department of
Licenses and Inspections before a hydrant can be used. The permit shall contain the terms
and conditions that are required of the Customer in order for the Customer to use the
hydrant.
(b) The costs for obtaining a permit shall be as follows.
(1) One Week Permit for use of standard pressure hydrant…….…$ 2,300
(2) Six Month Permit for use of standard pressure hydrant…..…$ 17,285
6.10 Flow Tests.
When a Customer requests the Department to conduct a flow test on a fire hydrant to
determine the volume and residual pressure available on a domestic or fire connection, or
at a specific location, the charge shall be six hundred and eighty-five dollars ($685) for
each flow test.
6.11 Water Service Line Investigations and/or Inspections
When a Customer or a duly authorized representative of a Customer requests the
Department to conduct an investigation to locate and/or to inspect the water service line at
a specific location, the charge shall be one hundred and seventy-five dollars ($175) for
each investigation or inspection. The charge shall be assessed regardless of the result of
the investigation or inspection.
6.12 Payment.
All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
7.0 MISCELLANEOUS SEWER CHARGES

29


Charges for miscellaneous sewer services supplied by the City of Philadelphia shall be
effective September 1, 2026, as follows.
7.1

Sewer Charges for Groundwater.

(a) Sewer charges for groundwater discharged to the City's sewer system shall be as
follows:
(1) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the rate shall be $17.10 per 1,000
cubic feet.
(b) To determine the quantity of such discharged groundwater, the Customer shall install a
meter or measuring device satisfactory to the Department. If, in the opinion of the
Department, it is not feasible to install a meter or measuring device, the Department may
designate some other method of measuring or estimating the quantity of discharged
groundwater.
7.2 Charges for Wastewater Service.
(a) The charge for sanitary type wastewater delivered to any of the City's Water Pollution
Control Plants shall be as follows.
(1) Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the rate shall be $77.12 per 1,000
gallons.
(b) Where accurate quantities of wastewater delivered cannot be determined, such
quantities shall be estimated for billing purposes by such fair and reasonable methods as
shall be approved by the Water Commissioner.
(c) The locations, times, delivery procedures and exact nature of the pollution
characteristics of the delivered wastewater shall be determined by the Department.
(d) From time to time, Customers shall be required to file with the Department a
questionnaire establishing or revising information on the quantity and quality of
wastewater delivered and other pertinent data deemed necessary by the Department.
Failure to furnish such information shall be sufficient grounds for denial or termination of
delivery privileges.
(e) Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of delivered wastewater shall
be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association (AWWA) and the Water
Environment Federation (WEF).

30


(f) If any bill for the above services shall remain unpaid for more than sixty (60) days
from date rendered, the Department may refuse acceptance of additional wastewater until
all unpaid balances, with late charges, are paid in full.
7.3

Wastewater Discharge Permit.

All Industrial Users contributing wastewater to the City's sewer system must obtain a
permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in Chapter 5
of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is six thousand
and twenty-five dollars ($6,025).
7.4

Groundwater Discharge Permit.

All Industrial Users contributing groundwater to the City’s sewer system must obtain a
permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations contained in
Chapter 5 of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is three
thousand three hundred and sixty-five dollars($3,365).
7.5 Manhole Pump-out Permit
(a) Any non-domestic User discharging wastewater from underground structures to the
City’s sewer system must obtain a manhole pump-out permit from the Department
pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in Chapter 5 of the Department’s
regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit is three thousand two hundred and
ninety dollars ($3,290).
(b) In the event a User requests discharge locations in the City’s separate sewer areas
under this permit, the City may assess additional fees for any work associated with the
review of this request and the identification of the discharge locations.
7.6

Trucked or Hauled Wastewater Permit

Any person trucking or hauling wastewater to the POTW must first obtain a septage
discharge permit from the Department pursuant to the Wastewater Control Regulations in
Chapter 5 of the Department’s regulations. The fee for each new or renewal permit shall
be two thousand five hundred and eighty-five dollars ($2,585).
7.7

PHOTOGRAPHIC & VIDEO INSPECTION

When a Customer or a duly authorized representative of a Customer requests the
Department to conduct a photographic or video inspection of a private sewer line at a
specific location, the charge shall be two hundred and seventy five dollars ($275) for each
photographic or video inspection. The charge shall be assessed regardless of the result of
the photographic or video inspection.
7.8

Payment.

31


All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
8.0 MISCELLANEOUS PLAN REVIEW AND INSPECTION CHARGES
8.1 Stormwater Plan Review and Inspection Fees.
All Development plans submitted to the Department under Chapter 6 of the Department's
regulations for stormwater management approvals shall be subject to a plan review fee.
(a) Fees.
(1) A fee of one thousand seven hundred and ninety-five dollars ($1,795) shall be
due upon submission of the Conceptual Stormwater Management Plan for review.
(2) A fee of two hundred and sixty dollars ($260) per hour of review time shall be
due prior to issuance of the Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan approval.
(i) Review time shall be based on the City’s tabulation of actual hours
expended by Department employees or consultants reviewing the plans associated with a
particular development project for compliance with Chapter 6 of the Department’s
regulations.
(3) A fee of four hundred and twenty dollars ($420) for the final inspection of a
development project to confirm compliance with Chapter 6 of the Department’s
regulations shall be due prior to issuance of the Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Plan approval.
(4) A fee is applicable when a reinspection of a site determines that a previously
found violation of Erosion and Sediment (E&S) control requirements has not been
corrected. Fees for subsequent inspections for a site found to be in continuing noncompliance shall be assessed as follows:
(i) Second Reinspection - one hundred and ten dollars ($110)
(ii) Third Reinspection - two hundred and twenty dollars ($220),
(a) Fourth and Any Subsequent Reinspection – three hundred and twenty-five dollars
($325).
(b) Refund of fees. The Department shall refund any fees specified above if a plan
submittal is not approved or denied within 21 days for conceptual site plans and within 45
days for technical site plans.
8.2 Stormwater Management Fee in Lieu.

32


The fee in lieu shall be calculated as follows:
(a) For an exemption to only the Water Quality Requirement of Chapter 6 of the
Department’s regulations the fee in lieu shall be forty dollars ($40.00) per square
foot based on the total Directly Connected Impervious Area within the limit of
Earth Disturbance.
8.3 Utility Plan Review Fees.
All Utility Plans submitted to the Department to receive building permit approval in
accordance with Administrative Code Section A-305.2.1.6 shall be subject to a plan
review fee.
(a) A fee of three hundred and sixty-five dollars ($365) shall be due upon submission of
the Utility Plan for review.
(b) Parcels that qualify as Community Garden pursuant to Section 19-1603 of the
Philadelphia Code are exempt from the Utility Plan Review Fee.
9.0 FIRE SERVICE CONNECTIONS
Fire service connection charges shall consist of a monthly service charge and a quantity
charge and shall be effective September 1, 2026, as follows.
9.1 Charges.
(a) Monthly Service Charges.
(1) The monthly service charges for the furnishing of water for the purpose of fire
protection effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, shall be as follows:
Connection Size

Service Charge

Up through 4-inch
6-inch
8-inch
10-inch
12-inch

$ 38.44
72.74
111.43
162.76
270.99

(b) The City may permit fire service connections to its water system outside the City of
Philadelphia only in properties contiguous to the City where in the opinion of the Water

33


Commissioner water service for fire protection may be furnished without interference with
water service to properties within the City.
(c) Pipe connections to the Philadelphia water system, meters and other service
requirements shall be in accordance with the standard fire service requirements of the
Department.
(d) Quantity Charges.
(1) In addition to the service charge, the quantity charge portion of each bill is
determined by applying the quantity charge rate shown below to all water use. In
addition, the quantity charge will also include a TAP Rate Rider Surcharge, as set forth in
Section 10.
Effective September 1, 2026 and thereafter, the quantity charge shall be as follows:
1 Mcf = 1,000 cubic feet = 7,480 gallons
Monthly Water
Usage
First 2 Mcf
(0 to 2 Mcf)
Next 98 Mcf
(2.1 to 100 Mcf)
Next 1,900 Mcf
(100.1 to 2,000 Mcf)
Over 2,000 Mcf

Base
Charge Per
Mcf
$73.13

TAP-R
Per Mcf

Total Charge
Per Mcf

$3.59

$76.72

68.72

3.59

72.31

53.87

3.59

57.46

52.40

3.59

55.99

Note: Actual TAP-R rates are subject to Annual Reconciliation and the determination of the
Rate Board.
(e) The provisions in this Section apply to all fire service connections.
9.2

Payment.

All billings for the above services are due and payable when rendered, unless stated
otherwise herein, and are subject to such penalties for late payment as is prescribed by
current ordinance or as may be amended. Payments for permits shall be made in full prior
to any permit being issued.
10.0 PROVISIONS FOR RECOVERY OF THE TIERED ASSISTANCE
PROGRAM (TAP) COSTS

34


The lost revenue related to TAP (the “TAP Costs”) will be recovered via a separate TAP
Rate Rider Surcharge Rate (TAP-R), which would be added to the water, fire service and
sewer quantity charge rate schedules. This TAP-R shall be increased or decreased for the
next rate period to reflect changes in TAP costs, and will be calculated and reconciled on
an annual basis in the manner set forth below.
10.1 Computation of the TAP-R
(a) The TAP-R Equation
The TAP-R shall be computed to the nearest one-hundredth of a dollar per MCF
($0.01/MCF) in accordance with the formula set forth below:
TAP-R = (C) – (E + I)
S
The TAP-R so computed, shall be applied as an adder to the water, fire service connection
and sewer quantity charge base rate schedules set forth for water in Section 2.1 (c); sewer
in Section 3.3 (b); and fire service in Section 9.1 (d), of these Rates and Charges. As a
result, the TAP-R shall consist of two sub-components:
(1) A “Water TAP-R” added to the water and fire service quantity “base rate”
($/MCF); and
(2) A “Sewer TAP-R” added to the sewer quantity “base rate” ($/MCF).
During the rate periods that TAP-R is effective, to recover the TAP Costs through Water
TAP-R and the Sewer TAP-R respectively, the total TAP Costs determined for a given
rate period will be apportioned between water and wastewater utilities based on the
proportion of water and wastewater net revenue requirement respectively to total net
revenue requirement. The percent allocation of TAP Costs between water and wastewater
utilities will be as follows:
(i)

Water TAP Cost Allocation: 43%

(ii)

Sewer TAP Cost Allocation: 57%

(b) Definitions
In computing the TAP-R pursuant to the formula above, the following definitions shall
apply:
(1) TAP-R - TAP Rate Rider Surcharge Rate ($/MCF).

35


(2) C – Cost in dollars of the estimated TAP Billing Loss for the projected period.
(3) E - The net over or under collection of the TAP-R surcharge amount for the Most
Recent Period. The net over or under collection will be calculated by comparing
the actual TAP Revenue Loss (resulting from discounts provided to TAP
Customers) with the actual TAP-R surcharge amounts billed to Non-TAP
Customers. Both the TAP Revenue Loss and the TAP-R billings, that are
determined for the rate periods, will be adjusted for collections by applying the
Department’s system-wide collection factor of 96.93%.
(4) I - Interest on any over or under recovery of the TAP-R for the Most Recent
Period. Interest will be computed on a monthly basis using a simple annual interest
rate. The interest rate will be based upon the yield to maturity of a particular date
of United States Treasury securities with a constant maturity for a 1-year Treasury
as complied and published in the Federal Reserve Statistical Release H.15 (519)
for the United States Treasury1, as it exists each year as of the first day of the
month, preceding the month of the annual reconciliation submission to the Rate
Board.
(5) S - Projected sales in MCF for Non-TAP customers.
(6) Most Recent Period – The Current Fiscal Year and/or the period for which TAPR reconciliation is performed.
(7) Next Rate Period – The fiscal year and/or the period that immediately follows the
Most Recent Period, and in which the TAP-R is effective.
10.2 Filing with the Philadelphia Water, Sewer and Storm Water Rate Board
The Water Department shall initiate the annual TAP Rate Rider Reconciliation by filing
an advance notice with the Philadelphia Water, Sewer and Storm Water Rate Board (the
“Rate Board”) and City Council in accordance with the procedures and standards
established by the Rate Board through its regulations.
10.3 TAP-R Surcharge Rates
(a) Water TAP-R
The Water TAP-R portion of each water bill is determined by applying the Water TAP-R
surcharge rate shown below to all water use.
1

Currently available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/.

36


1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
(1)

Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the Water TAP-R surcharge shall
be $3.59 per Mcf as determined by the annual reconciliation filing.

(b) Sewer TAP-R
The Sewer TAP-R portion of each sewer bill is determined by applying the Sewer TAP-R
surcharge rate shown below to all water use.
1 Mcf = 1,000 Cubic Feet = 7,480 gallons
(1)

Effective September 1, 2025 and thereafter, the Sewer TAP-R surcharge shall
be $5.07 per Mcf as determined by the annual reconciliation filing.

37

